1

WHY MEN
DON'T LISTEN

&
WOMEN CAN'T
READ MAPS
Barbara & Allan Pease

2

Copyright © Allan Pease 2001
All rights reserved
The right of Allan Pease to be identified
as the author of this work has been
asserted by him in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
This edition published in 2001 by
Pease International Pty Ltd
Phone: 61-7-5444 7000
Fax: 61-7-5444 7550
Email: info@peaseinternational
Web: www. peaseinternational. com
Published in Great Britain by
Orion Publishing Group
Distributed in Australia and New Zealand
by HarperCollins Ltd
Imported to Great Britain by Pease Training International Ltd.
Tel: 01564 741 888 Fax: 01564 741 800
Email: peaseuk@compuserve. com
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
Designed by Karen Stirling Printed by Griffin
Press, Netley
ISBN 0 957 81081 4
Sc/PR JaBay

3

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Introduction 14
A Sunday Drive
Why Writing This book Was So Tough
1. Same Species, Different Worlds

I9

Some Things Are Obvious
Different Job Specs
The 'Stereotype' Argument
Is it All a Male Conspiracy?
Where We (the Authors) Stand
The Nature Versus Nurture Argument
Your Human Guidebook
How We Got This Way
We Didn't Expect it to Be Like This
Why Mum and Dad Can't Help
We're Still Just Another Animal
2. Making Perfect Sense 34
Women as Radar Detectors
The Eyes Have It
Eyes in the Back of her Head?
Why Womens' Eyes See So Much
The Slippery Case of the Missing Butter
Men and Ogling
Seeing is Believing
Why Men Should Drive at Night

4

Why Women Have a 'Sixth Sense'
Why Men Can't Lie to Women
She Hears Better Too...
Women Read Between the Lines
Men Can 'Hear' Direction
Why Boys Don't Listen
Men Miss the Details
The Magic of Touch
Women Are Touchy-Feely
Why Men Are So Thick-Skinned
A Taste for Life
Something in the Air
The X-Philes
Why Men Are Called 'Insensitive'
3. It's All In The Mind 57
Why We're Smarter than the Rest
How Our Brains Defend Territory

The Brains Behind Success
What's Where in the Brain
Where Brain Research Began
How the Brain is Analysed
Why Women Are Better Connected
Why Men Can Only Do One Thing at a Time!
Try the Toothbrush Test
Why We Are Who We Are
Programming the Foetus
The Brain-Wiring Test
How to Score the Test
Analysing the Result
A Final Word

5

4. Talking And Listening 85
The 'Blue or Gold Shoes' Strategy Why Males
Can't Talk Proper
Boys and Their Schooling
Why Women Are Great Talkers
Why Women Need to Talk
The Hormonal Connection
Women Love to Talk
Men Talk Silently to Themselves
The Downside of Silent Talk
Women Think Aloud
The Downside of Thinking Aloud
Women Talk, Men Feel Nagged
Why Couples Fail

How Men Talk
Women Multi-Track
What Brain Scans Show
Strategies for Talking with Men
Why Men Love Big Words
Women Use Words for Reward
Women Are Indirect
Men Are Direct
What to Do About It
How to Motivate a Man to Action
Women Talk Emotively, Men Are Literal
How Women Listen
Men Listen Like Statues
How to Use the Grunt
How to Get a Man to Listen
The Schoolgirl Voice

6

5. Spatial Ability: Maps, Targets And Parallel
Parking 118
How a Map Almost Led to Divorce
Sexist Thinking
The Lunch-Chaser in Action
Why Men Know Where to Go
Why Boys Hang Out in Video Arcades
Boys' Brains Develop Differently
Diana and her Furniture
Testing Spatial Ability
How Women Can Navigate
What if You Can't Find North?
The Flying Map
The Upside-Down Map
A Final Test
How to Avoid an Argument
How to Argue While Driving

How to Sell to a Woman
The Pain of Reverse Parallel Parking
Women Are Safer Drivers
How Women Were Misled
Spatial Ability in Education
Spatial Skill Occupations
Billiards and Nuclear Science
The Computer Industry
Maths and Accounting
All Things Being Equal...
Boys and their Toys
How Women Feel
Can You Improve Your Spatial Skill?
Some Useful Strategies
In Summary

7

6. Thoughts, Attitudes, Emotions And Other
Disaster Areas 149
Our Different Perceptions
Boys Like Things, Girls Like People
Boys Compete, Girls Co-operate

What We Talk About
Talking Dirty
What Modern Men and Women Want
Emotion in the Brain
Women Value Relationships, Men Value Work
Why Men 'Do Things'
Why Men and Women Leave Each Other
Why Men Hate to Be Wrong
Why Men Hide Their Emotions
Why Men Hang Out with the Boys
Why Men Hate Advice
Why Men Offer Solutions
Why Stressed Women Talk
Why Stressed Men Won't Talk
Using Spatials to Solve Problems
Why Men Flick the TV Channels
How to Get Boys to Talk
When They're Both Stressed
The Complete Shut-Out
How Men Alienate Women
Why Men Can't Handle Women Being Emotional
The Crying Game
Eating Out
Shopping: Her Joy, His Terror
How to Give a Woman a Sincere Compliment

8

7. Our Chemical Cocktail 176
How Hormones Control Us The
Chemicals of 'Falling in Love'
Hormonal Chemistry
Why Blondes Have High Fertility PMT
and Sex Drive
Woman's Chemical Gloom
Testosterone: Bonus or Curse?
The Case of the Flying Crockery Why
Men Are Aggressive
Why Men Work So Hard Testosterone
and Spatial Ability Why Women Hate
Reverse Parking Mathematics and
Hormones Modern Man's Hunting
Why Men Have Pot Bellies and Women Have Large
Rears
8. Boys Will Be Boys, But Not Always
Gays, Lesbians and Transsexuals
Homosexuality is Part of History
Is it Genetic or a Choice?
Why People Look to the Father
Can the 'Choice' Be Changed?
The Case of Identical Gay Twins
It's in their Genes
The 'Gay Gene'
Gay Fingerprints and Family Studies
Experimental Changes
It's What Happens in the Womb
The Transsexual Brain

Are We Slaves to Our Biology?
Why Gay Men Aren't All Alike
Lesbian Differences

9

197

9. Men, Women and Sex 216

How Sex Began
Where is Sex in the Brain?
Why Men Can't Help Themselves
Why Women Are Faithful
Men Are Microwaves, Women Are Electric Ovens
Why We Argue About Sex
Sex Drive and Stress
How Much Sex Are We Having?
Sex on the Brain
How Sex Improves Your Health
Monogamy and Polygamy
Why Men Are Promiscuous
The Rooster Effect
Why Men Want Women to Dress Like Tarts
(But Never in Public)
Why Men Are Three-Minute Wonders
The Ball Game
Balls Have Brains Too
Men and Ogling
What Men Need to Do
What We Really Want, Long-Term
Why Men Want 'Just One Thing'
Why Sex Suddenly Stops
What Men Want From Sex
What Women Want From Sex
Why Men Don't Talk During Sex
The Orgasm Objective
What Turns Us On?
How Men Get a Raw Deal
The Aphrodisiac Myth
Men and their Pornography
Are There Female Sex Maniacs?
Lights Off or On?
10

10. Marriage, Love And Romance 255
Why Women Need Monogamy
Why Men Avoid Commitment
Where is Love in the Brain?
Love: Why Men Fall In and Women Fall Out
Why Men Can't Say 'I Love You'
How Men Can Separate Love from Sex
When Women Make Love, Men Have Sex
Why Great Partners Look Attractive
Do Opposites Attract?
Physical Opposites Attract
The Hips-to-Waist Ratio is the Key
Men and Romance
Some Surefire Romance Tips for Men
Why Men Stop Touching and Talking
Why Men Grope and Women Don't
Is There Love in Springtime?
How to Think Sexy
Recreating Infatuation
How to Find the Right Partner
11. Towards A Different Future 279

What Do Men and Women Really Want?
Occupational Choices
The Feminising of Business
What To Do About Boys
No Role Models for Boys
The Sports Hero
Is This All Politically Correct?
Our Biology Hasn't Changed Much
Finally...
References 293

11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Ray & Ruth Pease, Bill & Beat Suter, Alison & Mike Tilley,
Jaci Elliott, Stella Brocklesby, Paula & Natasha Thompson,
Michael Hedger, Christine Maher, Ray Martin, Dr Rudi
Brasch, Prof Stephen Dain, Christine Craigie, Dr Themi
Garagounas, Prof Dennis Burnham, Prof Barbara Gillham,
Bryan Cockerill, Leanne Wilson, Geoff Arnold, Lisa
Tierney, Robyn McCormick, Kerri-Anne Kennerley, Geoff
Burch, Jonathan Norman, Marie Ricot, Julie Fenton, Nick
Symons, Richard & Linda Denny, Angela & Sheila WatsonChallis, Simon Howard, Tom Kenyon-Slaney, Tony &
Patrica Earle, Darley Anderson, Sue Irvine, Leanne Christie,
Anita & Dave Kite, Barry Toepher, Bert Newton, Brendan
Walsh, Carrie Siipola, Debbie Tawse, Celia Barnes,
Christina Peters, Hannelore Federspiel, David & Jan
Goodwin, Eunice & Ken Worden, Frank & Cavill Boggs,
Graham & Tracey Dufty, Graham Shiels, Grant Sexton, Kaz
Lyons, Barry Markoff, Peter Rosetti, Max Hitchins, Debbie
Mehrtens, Jack & Valerie Collis, John Allanson, John
Hepworth, Pru Watts, Michael & Sue Rabbit, Michael &
Sue Burnett, Michael & Kaye Goldring, Mike Schoettler,
Peter & Jill Gosper, Rachel Jones, Ros & Simon Townsend,
Sussan Hawryluk, Sue Williams, Terry & Tammy Butler, W.
Mitchell, Walter Dickman, Bea Pullar, Alan Collinson,
Russell Jeffery, Sandra & Loren Watts, Katrina Flynn, Luke
Causby, Peter Draper, Scott Gilmour, Janet Gilmour, Lisa
Petrich, Geoff Weatherburn, Dawn Eccles-Simkins, David
Orchard, Donn Guthrie, Chris Stewart, Howard Gibbs, Sue
McIlwraith, Jules Di Maio, Nathan Haynes, Michael Kelly,
Gary Larson, Dorie Simmonds and Trevor Dolby.

12

13

INTRODUCTION

14

a sunny Sunday afternoon as Bob and Sue set
Itoutwaswith
their three teenage daughters on a lazy
drive down to the beach. Bob was at the wheel and Sue
sat beside him, turning towards the back every few
minutes to join in the animated series of conversations
going on among their daughters. To Bob, it sounded as
if they were all talking at once, creating an incessant
barrage of noise that just didn't make any sense at all.
Eventually, he'd had enough.
'Can you lot please shut up!' he yelled.
There was a stunned silence.
'Why?' asked Sue, eventually.
'Because I'm trying to drive!' he replied, exasperated.
The women looked at each other in complete
confusion. 'Trying to drive?' they mumbled.
They could not see any connection between their conversation and his ability to drive. He couldn't understand why they were all speaking simultaneously,
sometimes on different subjects, with none of them
appearing to listen.
Why couldn't they just keep quiet and let him concentrate on driving? Their talking had already caused
him to miss the last turn-off on the highway.
The fundamental problem here is simple: men and
women are different. Not better or worse - just
different. Scientists, anthropologists and sociobiologists
have known this for years, but they have also been
painfully aware that to express this knowledge publicly
in such a politically correct world could turn them into
social pariahs. Society today is determined to believe

15

that men and women possess exactly the same skills,
aptitudes and potentials - just as science, ironically, is
beginning to prove they are completely different.
And where does this leave us? As a society, on
extremely shaky ground. It's only by understanding the
differences between men and women that we can really
start building on our collective strengths - rather than
on our individual weaknesses. In this book, we seize
upon the enormous advances that have recently been
made in human evolutionary science and show how the
lessons learned apply to male and female relationships.
The conclusions we unearth are controversial. They are
confronting. They are, occasionally, extremely disturbing. But they give us all a solid and thorough understanding of the many strange things that happen
between men and women. If only Bob and Sue had read
it before they had set out...

Why Writing This Book Was So Tough
This book took us three years, and more than 400, 000
kilometres, to write. In the course of our research, we
studied papers, interviewed experts and gave seminars
throughout Australia, New Zealand, Singapore,
Thailand, Hong Kong, Malaysia, England, Scotland,
Ireland, Italy, Greece, Germany, Holland, Spain, Turkey,
the USA, South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia,
Namibia, Angola, Switzerland, Austria, Finland,
Indonesia, Bulgaria, Saudi Arabia, Poland, Hungary,
Borneo, Russia, Belgium, France, Japan and Canada.
One of the most difficult tasks was getting public and
private organisations to give their opinions on the facts.
For example, fewer than 1% of all commercial airline
pilots are female. When we tried to discuss this with
airline officials, many were too terrified to offer an
16

opinion for fear of being accused of being sexist or antifemale. Many said 'no comment' and some organisations even made threats about their names being
mentioned in our book. Women executives were
generally more obliging, although many took an immediately defensive position and saw this research as an
attack on feminism without even knowing what it was
about. Some of the authoritative opinions we have
documented were obtained 'off the record' from
corporate executives and university professors in dimlylit rooms, behind closed doors, with guarantees that
they were not being quoted nor their organisations
named. Many had two opinions - their politically
correct public opinion and their real opinion, which
was 'not to be quoted'.
You will find this book sometimes challenging,
sometimes startling, but always fascinating. While it is
based on hard scientific evidence, we have used
everyday conversations, beliefs and scenarios that range
from the humorous to the downright hilarious to make
sure it's fun to read. We have tried to boil all the
evidence down into the simplest explanations while, at
the same time, avoiding oversimplification. This
approach makes the information easily accessible for
most people, but can annoy others in the science world
who would prefer to read a science journal. Our
objective in writing this book is to help you learn more
about both yourself and the opposite sex, so that your
interaction and relationships can be more fulfilling,
enjoyable and satisfying.
One driving organisation measured gender differences
in reverse parking ability and did comparisons in
several countries. Their results were so astounding that
when the report was released they were inundated with
complaints that they were sexist and racist. The report
was immediately withdrawn and locked away, never to
17

be seen again, as it was clearly bad for business.
We obtained a copy of this study and will discuss the
results but, for legal and ethical reasons, we can't reveal
the source.
This book is dedicated to all the men and women who
have ever sat up at 2am pulling their hair out as they
plead with their partners, 'But why don't you understand?' Relationships fail because men still don't understand why a woman can't be more like a man, and
women expect their men to behave just like they do.
Not only will this book help you come to grips with the
opposite sex, it'll help you understand yourself. And
how you can both lead happier, healthier and more harmonious lives as a result.
Barbara and Allan Pease

18

CHAPTER 1

SAME SPECIES,
DIFFERENT WORLDS

19

en and women are different. Not better or
worse - different. Just about the only thing they
have in common is that they belong to the same
species. They live in different worlds, with different
values and according to quite different sets of rules.
Everyone knows this, but very few people, particularly
men, are willing to admit it. The truth, however, is
most definitely out there. Look at the evidence.
Around 50% of marriages end in divorce in Western
countries and most serious relationships stop short of
becoming long-term. Men and women of every culture,
creed and hue constantly argue over their partners'
opinions, behaviour, attitudes and beliefs.

M

Some Things Are Obvious
When a man goes to a toilet, he usually goes for one
reason and one reason only. Women use toilets as social
lounges and therapy rooms. Women who go to a toilet
as strangers can come out best friends and lifelong
buddies. But everyone would be instantly suspicious of
the man who called out, 'Hey Frank, I'm going to the
toilet. You wanna come with me?'
Men dominate TV remote controls and flick through
the channels; women don't mind watching the commercials. Under pressure, men drink alcohol and invade
other countries; women eat chocolate and go shopping.
Women criticise men for being insensitive, uncaring,
not listening, not being warm and compassionate, not

20

talking, not giving enough love, not being committed to
relationships, wanting to have sex rather than make
love, turning the temperature down, and leaving the
toilet seat up.
Men criticise women about their driving, for not
being able to read street directories, for turning maps
upside down, for their lack of a sense of direction, for
talking too much without getting to the point, for not
initiating sex often enough, turning the temperature up,
and for leaving the toilet seat down. Men can never
find a pair of socks but their CDs are in alphabetical
order. Women can always find the missing set of
car keys, but rarely the most direct route to their destination. Men think they're the most sensible sex.
Women know they are.

How many men does it take to
change a roll of toilet paper?
It's unknown. It's never happened.
Men marvel at the way a woman can walk into a room
full of people and give an instant commentary on
everyone; women can't believe men are so unobservant.
Men are amazed how a woman can't see a red flashing
oil light on the car dashboard but can spot a dirty sock
in a dark corner 50 metres away. Women are bewildered by men who can consistently parallel park a car
in a tight spot using a rear-view mirror, but can never
find the G-spot.
If a woman is out driving and gets lost, she'll stop and
ask for directions. To a man, this is a sign of weakness.
He'll drive round in circles for hours, muttering things
like, 'I've found a new way to get there' or 'I'm in the
general area' and 'Hey, I recognise that petrol station!'
21

Different Job Specs
Men and women have evolved differently because they
had to. Men hunted, women gathered. Men protected,
women nurtured. As a result, their bodies and brains
evolved in completely different ways.
As their bodies physically changed to adapt to their
specific functions, so did their minds. Men grew taller
and stronger than most women, while their brains
developed to suit their tasks. Women were mostly
content for men to work away as they kept the cave
fires burning, and their brains evolved to cope with
their function in life.
Over millions of years, the brain structures
of men and women thus continued to change in
different ways. Now, we know the sexes process information differently. They think differently. They believe
different things. They have different perceptions, priorities and behaviours.
To pretend otherwise, is a recipe for heartache,
confusion and disillusionment all your life.

The 'Stereotype' Argument
Since the late 1980s, there has been an explosion of
research into male and female differences and the way
both the male and female brains work. For the first
time ever, advanced computer brainscanning equipment
has allowed us to see the brain operating 'live' and,
with that peek into the vast landscape of the human
mind, provided us with many of the answers to the
questions about male and female differences. The
research discussed in this book has been collected from
studies in scientific, medical, psychological and sociological studies and it all points clearly to one thing: All
22

things are not equal; men and women are different. For
most of the 20th Century those differences were
explained away by social conditioning; that is, we are
who we are because of our parents' and teachers'
attitudes which, in turn, reflected the attitudes of their
society. Baby girls were dressed in pink and given dolls
to play with; baby boys were dressed in blue and given
toy soldiers and football jerseys. Young girls were
cuddled and touched while boys were thumped on the
back and told not to cry. Until recently, it was believed
that when a baby was born its mind was a clean slate
on which its teachers could write its choices and preferences. The biological evidence now available,
however, shows a somewhat different picture of why
we think the way we do. It shows convincingly that it
is our hormones and brain wiring that are largely
responsible for our attitudes, preferences and
behaviour. This means that if boys and girls grew up on
a deserted island with no organised society or parents
to guide them, girls would still cuddle, touch, make
friends and play with dolls, while boys would compete
mentally and physically with each other and form
groups with a clear hierarchy.

The wiring of our brain in the womb and
the effect of hormones will determine
how we think and behave.
As you will see, the way our brains are wired and the
hormones pulsing through our bodies are the two
factors that largely dictate, long before we are born,
how we will think and behave. Our instincts are simply
our genes determining how our bodies will behave in
given sets of circumstances.
23

Is it All a Male Conspiracy?
Since the 1960s a number of pressure groups have tried
to persuade us to buck our biological legacy. They
claim that governments, religions and education
systems have added up to nothing more than a plot by
men to suppress women, colluding to keep good
women down. Keeping women pregnant was a way of
controlling them even more.
Certainly, historically, that's how it appears. But the
question needs to be asked: If women and men are
identical, as these groups claim, how could men ever
have achieved such total dominance over the world?
The study of how the brain works now gives us many
answers. We are not identical. Men and women should
be equal in terms of their opportunities to exercise their
full potential, but they are definitely not identical in
their innate abilities. Whether men and women are
equal is a political or moral question, but whether they
are identical is a scientific one.

The equality of men and women is a
political or moral issue; the essential
difference is a scientific one.
Those who resist the idea that our biology affects our
behaviour often do so with the best of intentions - they
oppose sexism. But they are confused about the difference
between equal and identical which are two completely
different issues. In this book, you will see how science
confirms that men and woman are profoundly different
both physically and mentally. They are not the same.
We have investigated the research of leading palaeontologists, ethnologists, psychologists, biologists and
24

neuro scientists. The brain differences between women
and men are now clear, beyond all speculation,
prejudice or reasonable doubt.
When weighing up the differences between males and
females discussed in this book, some people may say,
'No, that's not like me, I don't do that!' Well, maybe
they don't. But we are dealing here with average men
and women, that is, how most men and women behave
most of the time, in most situations and for most of the
past. 'Average' means that if you are in a room full of
people you'll notice that men are bigger and taller than
women, in fact 7% taller and an average 8% bigger.
The tallest or biggest person in the room may be a
woman, but overall the men are bigger and taller than
the women. In the Guinness Book of World Records
2001, the biggest and tallest people have almost always
been men. The tallest human on record was Robert
Wadlow from Alton, Illinois who, in June 1940,
measured 2. 72 metres (8 feet 11. 1 inches). The tallest
person in the year 2000 was Radhouane Charbib of
Tunisia who stood 2. 35 metres (7 feet 8. 9 inches).
History books are full of 'Big Johns' and 'Little Suzies'!
This is not sexist. It's fact.

Where We (the Authors) Stand
Reading this book, some people may begin to feel
smug, arrogant or angry. This is because, to a greater or
lesser extent, they are victims of idealistic philosophies
that claim women and men are the same, so let's clarify
our position on this now. We, the authors, are writing
this book to help you develop and improve your relationships with both sexes. We believe that men and
women should have equal opportunity to pursue a
career path in any field they choose and that equally
25

qualified people should receive equal compensation for
the same effort.
Difference is not the opposite of equality. Equality
means being free to choose to do the things we want to
do and difference means that, as men or women, we
may not want to do the same things. We usually choose
different things off the same list.
Our aim is to look objectively at male and female
relationships, explain the history, meanings and implications involved and to develop techniques and strategies for a happier and more fulfilling way of life. We
won't beat about the bush with suppositions, politically
correct cliches or scientific mumbo-jumbo. If something
looks like a duck, sounds like a duck, walks like a
duck and there is enough evidence to prove it's a
duck, then that's what we'll call it.
The evidence presented here shows that the sexes are
intrinsically inclined to behave in different ways. We are
not suggesting that either sex is bound to behave or
should behave in any particular way.

The Nature Versus Nurture Argument
Melissa gave birth to twins, a girl and a boy.
Jasmine, she wrapped in a pink blanket, and Adam,
in a blue one. Relatives brought soft fluffy toys as
gifts for Jasmine, and a toy football and a tiny football
jersey for Adam. Everyone cooed and gooed and talked
softly to Jasmine, telling her she was pretty and
gorgeous, but it was usually only the female
relatives who picked her up and cuddled her. When
the male relatives visited, they focused mostly on
Adam, speaking noticeably louder, poking his belly,
bouncing him up and down and proposing a future as
a football player.
26

Such a scenario will be familiar to everyone. It does,
however, raise the question: Is this adult behaviour
caused by our biology or is it learned behaviour that is
perpetuated from generation to generation? Is it nature
or nurture?
For most of the 20th century, psychologists and sociologists believed most of our behaviour and preferences
were learnt from our social conditioning and our environment. However, we know that nurturing is a learned
phenomenon - adoptive mothers, whether they are
human or monkey, usually do a superb job of nurturing
their infants. Scientists, on the other hand, have argued
that biology, chemistry and hormones are largely
responsible. Since 1990, there has been overwhelming
evidence to support this scientific view that we are born
with much of our brain software already in place. The
fact that men were usually the hunters and women the
nurturers even today dictates our behaviour, beliefs and
priorities. A major study at Harvard University shows
that we not only behave differently towards boy and
girl babies, we also use different words. To baby girls
we softly say, 'You're so sweet', 'You're a little sweetheart', 'You're a beautiful little girl' and to baby boys
we raise our voices and say, 'Hey, big boy!' and 'Wow,
you're so strong!'
Yet giving Barbie Dolls to girls and Action Men to
boys does not create their behaviour; it simply exacerbates it. Similarly, the Harvard study found that adults'
distinctive behaviour towards baby girls and boys only
accentuated the differences that already exist. When
you put a duck on a pond, it starts to swim. Look
beneath the surface, and you'll see the duck has webbed
feet. If you analyse its brain, you'll find that it evolved
with a 'swimming module' already in place. The pond
is just where the duck happens to be at the time and is
not causing its behaviour.
27

Research shows that we are more a product of our
biology than the victims of social stereotypes. We are
different because our brain is wired differently. This
causes us to perceive the world in different ways and
have different values and priorities. Not better or worse different.

Your Human Guidebook
This book is like a guidebook to visit a foreign culture
or country. It contains local slang and phrases, body
language signals and an insight into why the inhabitants are the way they are.
Most tourists travel to foreign countries without
having done much local research and become intimidated
or critical because the locals won't speak English or cook
burgers and chips. But to enjoy and benefit from the
experience of another culture you must first understand
its history and evolution. Then you need to learn basic
phrases and to sample their lifestyle for first hand experience and a deeper appreciation of that culture. That
way you won't look, sound and act like a tourist - the
kind of person who would have benefited just as much
from staying at home and merely thinking of other lands.
This book will show you how to enjoy and benefit
from the knowledge of the opposite sex. But first you
must understand their history and evolution.

On a visit to Windsor Castle,
an American tourist was heard to say,
'It's a wonderful castle, but why did
they build it so close to the airport?'
28

This book deals in facts and reality. It's about real
people, authentic research, actual events and recorded
conversations. And you don't need to worry about
dendrites, corpus callosum, neuropeptides, magnetic
resonance imaging and serotonin in researching brain
function. We did, but we're now keeping everything as
simple as possible to make it easy to read. We deal
largely with a relatively recent science called sociobiology - the study of how behaviour is explained by our
genes and our evolution.
You will discover a powerful set of concepts, techniques and strategies that are scientifically substantiated
and appear, for the most part, to be obvious or
common sense. We've cast aside all techniques,
practices or opinions that aren't grounded in, or proven
by, science.
We deal here with the modern naked ape - the ape
who controls the world with mega-computers and can
land on Mars, and who can still be traced directly back
to a fish. Millions of years was spent developing us as a
species, yet today, we are thrust into a technological,
politically correct world that makes little or no
allowance for our biology.
It took us nearly 100 million years to evolve into
a society sophisticated enough to put a man on the
moon, but he still had to go to the toilet like his
primitive ancestors when he got there. Humans may
look a little different from one culture to another but,
underneath, our biological needs and urges are the
same. We will demonstrate how our different behavioural traits are inherited or passed on from generation
to generation and, as you will see, there are practically
no cultural differences.
Let's now take a brief look at how our brain evolved.

29

How We Got This Way
Once upon a time, a long, long time ago, men and
women lived happily together and worked in harmony.
The man would venture out each day into a hostile and
dangerous world to risk his life as a hunter to bring
food back to his woman and their children, and he
would defend them against savage animals or enemies.
He developed long-distance navigational skills so he
could locate food and bring it home, and excellent
marksmanship skills so that he could hit a moving
target. His job description was straightforward: he was
a lunch-chaser, and that's all anyone expected of him.
The woman, however, felt valued because her man
would put his life on the line to care for his family. His
success as a man was measured by his ability to make a
kill and bring it home, and his self-worth was measured
by her appreciation for his struggle and effort. The
family depended on him to carry out his job description
as a lunch-chaser and protector - and nothing else.
There was never any need for him to 'analyse the relationship' and he wasn't expected to put out the garbage
or help change the nappies.
The woman's role was equally clear. Being appointed
the child-bearer directed the way she would evolve and
how her skills would become specialised to meet that
role. She needed to be able to monitor her immediate
surroundings for signs of danger, have excellent shortrange navigational skills, using landmarks to find her
way, and have a highly-tuned ability to sense small
changes in the behaviour and appearance of children
and adults. Things were simple: He was the lunchchaser, she was the nest-defender.
Her day would be spent caring for her children, collecting fruits, vegetables and nuts and interacting with
the other women in the group. She did not have to
30

concern herself with the major food supply or fighting
enemies, and her success was measured by her ability to
sustain family life. Her self-worth came from the man's
appreciation of her home-making and nurturing skills.
Her ability to bear children was considered magical,
even sacred, for she alone held the secret to giving life.
She was never expected to hunt animals, fight enemies
or change light bulbs.
Survival was difficult but the relationship was easy.
And this was the way it was for hundreds of thousands
of years. At the end of each day, the hunters would
return with their kill. The kill was divided equally and
everyone would eat together in the communal cave.
Each hunter would trade part of his kill with the
woman for her fruit and vegetables.
After the meal, the men would sit around the fire,
gazing into it, playing games, telling stories or sharing
jokes. It was a prehistoric man's version of flicking TV
channels with his remote control or being absorbed in
a newspaper. They were exhausted from their hunting
efforts and were recuperating to begin the hunt again
the next day. The women would continue to tend the
children and make sure the men were sufficiently
fed and rested. Each appreciated the other's efforts.
Men were not considered lazy and women were not
seen as their oppressed handmaidens.
These simple rituals and behaviours still exist
amongst ancient civilisations in places like Borneo,
parts of Africa and Indonesia, and with some
Aboriginal Australians, New Zealand Maoris, and the
Inuit of Canada and Greenland. In these cultures each
person knows and understands his or her role. Men
appreciate women and women appreciate men. Each
sees the other as uniquely contributing to the family's
survival and well-being. But for men and women who
live in modern civilised countries, these old rules have
31

been thrown out - and chaos, confusion and unhappiness have been left in their place.
We Didn't Expect it to Be Like This
The family unit is no longer solely dependent on men
for its survival and women are no longer expected to
stay at home as nurturers and home-makers. For the
first time in the history of our species, most men and
women are confused about their job descriptions. You,
the reader of this book, are the first generation of
humans to face a set of circumstances that your forefathers or mothers never had to tackle. For the first
time ever, we are looking to our partners for love,
passion and personal fulfilment because basic survival
is no longer critical. Our modern social structure
usually provides a basic level of subsistence through
social security, National Health, consumer protection
laws and various Government institutions. So what are
the new rules, and where do you learn them? This
book attempts to provide some answers.
Why Mum and Dad Can't Help
If you were born before 1960, you grew up watching
your parents behave towards each other based on the
ancient rules of male and female survival. Your parents
were repeating the behaviour they learned from their
parents who, in turn, were copying their parents, who
mimicked their parents, and back it goes to the ancient
cave people in their clearly defined roles.
Now the rules have changed completely, and your
parents don't know how to help. The divorce rate for
newlyweds is now around 50% and, taking defacto and
32

gay relationships into consideration, the real breakup rate
for couples is likely to be over 70%. We need to learn a
new set of rules in order to discover how to be happy and
survive emotionally intact into the 21st Century.

We're Still Just Another Animal
Most people have difficulty thinking of themselves as
just another animal. They refuse to face the fact that
96% of what can be found in their bodies can also be
found inside a pig or a horse or that our DNA is 97. 5%
identical to that of a gorilla and 98. 4% to that of a
chimpanzee. The only thing that makes us different
from other animals is our ability to think and make
forward plans. Other animals can only respond to situations based on the genetic wiring of their brain and by
repetition of behaviour. They cannot think; they can
only react.
Most people accept and acknowledge that animals
have instincts that largely determine their behaviour.
This instinctive behaviour is easy to see - birds sing,
frogs croak, male dogs cock their leg and cats stalk their
prey. But these are not intellectual behaviours, so many
people have difficulty making the connection between
this behaviour and their own. They even ignore the fact
that their own first behaviours were instinctive - crying
and sucking.
Whatever behaviours we inherit, positive or negative,
from our parents are likely to be passed on to our
children the same way it happens with all animals. When
we as humans accept ourselves as an animal whose
impulses are honed by millions of years of evolution, it
makes it easier to understand our basic urges and
impulses, and to be more accepting of ourselves and
others. And therein lies the way to true happiness.
33

CHAPTER 2

MAKING PERFECT SENSE

34

T

he party was already in full swing when John and
Sue arrived. Inside, Sue looked John full in the
face and, without appearing to move her lips, said,
'Look at that couple over by the window. ' John
turned his head to take a look. 'Don't look now!' she
hissed, 'you're so obvious!' Sue couldn't understand
why John had to turn his head so indiscreetly, and John
couldn't believe that Sue could see the other people in
the room without doing so.
In this chapter we will explore research into the
sensory perception differences between men and women
and the implications they have on our relationships.

Women as Radar Detectors
It is obvious to a woman when another woman is upset
or feeling hurt, while a man would generally have to
physically witness tears, a temper tantrum or be
slapped around the face before he'd even have a clue
anything was going on. For, like most female mammals,
women are equipped with far more finely tuned sensory
skills than men. As child-bearers and nest-defenders,
they needed the ability to sense subtle mood and
attitude changes in others. What is commonly called
'women's intuition' is mostly a woman's acute ability to
notice small details and changes in the appearance or
behaviour of others. It's something that, throughout
history, has bewildered men who play around - and are
invariably caught.

35

One of our friends said he couldn't believe how
wonderful his wife's eyesight was when he had
something to hide, but how it seemed to
desert her totally when it came to backing the car
into the garage. Estimating the distance between the
car fender and the garage wall while moving is,
however, a spatial skill located in the right
hemisphere in men and is not strong in most
women. We'll discuss that later in Chapter 5.

'My wife can see a blonde hair on my
coat from twenty feet, but she hits the
garage door when she parks the car'
Nest-defenders, to safeguard their family's survival,
needed to be able to pick up small changes in the
behaviour of their offspring that could signal pain,
hunger, injury, aggression or depression. Males,
being lunch-chasers, were never around the cave
long enough to learn to read non-verbal signals or the
ways
of
interpersonal
communication.
Neuropsychologist Professor Ruben Gur of the
University of Pennsylvania used brain scan tests to
show that when a man's brain is in a resting state,
at least 70% of its electrical activity is shut down.
Scans of women's brains showed 90% activity
during the same state, confirming that women are
constantly receiving and analysing information from
their environment. A woman knows her children's
friends, hopes, dreams, romances, secret fears, what
they are thinking, how they are feeling and,
usually, what mischief they are plotting. Men are
vaguely aware of some short people also living in
the house.
36

The Eyes Have It
The eye is an extension of the brain that sits outside the
skull. The retina at the back of the eyeball contains
about 130 million rod-shaped cells called photoreceptors to deal with black and white, and seven million
cone-shaped cells to handle colour. The X chromosome
provides these colour cells. Women have two X chromosomes which gives them a greater variety of cones
than men and this difference is noticeable in how
women describe colours in greater detail. A man will
use basic colour descriptions like red, blue and green,
but a woman will talk of bone, aqua, teal, mauve and
apple green.
Human eyes have noticeable whites which other
primates lack. This allows for the movement of the eye
and the direction of the gaze which are vital to human
face-to-face communication. Womens' eyes display more
white than mens' eyes because close-range personal communication is an integral part of female bonding, and
more white allows a greater range of eye signals to be
sent and received in the direction that the eyes move.
This type of eye communication is not critical to
most other species of animal and so they have little or
no whites and rely on body language as the main form
of communication.

Eyes in the Back of her Head?
Well, not quite, but close. Women not only have a
greater variety of cones in the retina, they also have
wider peripheral vision than men. As a nest-defender, a
woman has brain software that allows her to receive an
arc of at least 45° clear vision to each side of her head
and above and below her nose. Many women's periph37

eral vision is effective up to almost 180°. A man's
eyes are larger than a woman's and his brain
configures them for a type of long-distance tunnel
vision which means that he can see clearly and
accurately directly in front of him and over greater
distances, almost like a pair of binoculars.

Women have wider peripheral
vision, men have tunnel vision.
As a hunter, a man needed vision that would allow
him to zero in on, and pursue, targets in the distance.
He evolved with almost blinkered vision so that he
would not be distracted from targets, whereas a
woman needed eyes to allow a wide arc of vision so
that she could monitor any predators sneaking up
on the nest. This is why modern men can find their
way effortlessly to a distant pub, but can never find
things in fridges, cupboards and drawers.

38

In the UK in 1997, there were 4, 132 child pedestrians
killed or injured on the roads, of which 2, 640 were
boys and 1, 492 were girls. In Australia, boy pedestrian
fatalities and injuries are more than double that of girls.
Boys take more risks crossing the road than girls and
this, combined with poorer peripheral vision, increases
their injury rate.
You can increase your peripheral vision range with
practice, just as fighter pilots do. The arc of a person's
peripheral vision can also increase under life-threatening
circumstances. During a prison riot at Australia's Perth
prison in 1999, inmates held several prison officers
hostage. They announced that unless their demands
were met, the officers would be killed. Prison
officer Lance Bremen reported that, until that time, he
had 'typical male tunnel vision'. Having survived the
incident, his peripheral vision had increased to
almost 180 degrees. Because of the trauma of the event
and the fear of being killed, his brain had expanded his
vision range to monitor anyone trying to sneak up on
him.

Why Women's Eyes See So Much
Billions of photons of light equal to 100 megabytes of
computer data strike the retina of the eye every second.
This is too much for the brain to handle so it edits
the information down to only what is necessary
for survival. For example, once your brain understands
all the colours of the sky, it selects only what it needs to
see - the colour blue. Our brain narrows our vision so
that we can concentrate on a specific thing. If we are
searching for a needle in a carpet, we have a more concentrated narrow field of vision. Men's brains, being prewired for hunting, see a much narrower field. Women's
39

brains decode information over a wider peripheral range
because of their past defending the nest.

The Slippery Case of the Missing Butter
Every woman in the world has had the following conversation with a male who is standing in front of an
open fridge.
David: 'Where's the butter?'
Jan: 'It's in the fridge. '
David: 'I'm looking there, but I can't see any butter. '
Jan: 'Well it's there. I put it in ten minutes ago!'
David: 'No. You must have put it somewhere else.
There's definitely no butter in this fridge!'
At that, Jan strides into the kitchen, thrusts her arm into
the fridge and, as if by magic, produces a tub of butter.
Inexperienced men sometimes feel that this is a trick and
they accuse women of always hiding things from them
in drawers and cupboards. Socks, shoes, underwear,
jam, butter, car keys, wallets - they're all there, they just
can't see them. With her wider arc of peripheral vision a
woman can see most of the contents of a fridge or
cupboard without moving her head. Her oestrogen
hormones allow her to identify matching items in a
drawer, cupboard or across a room and later remember
objects in a complex random pattern - such as where
the butter or jam is in the refrigerator. New research
also suggests that male brains are searching in the fridge
for the word B-U-T-T-E-R. If it's facing the wrong way,
he virtually can't see it. This is why men move their
heads. Men move their heads from side to side and up
and down as they scan for the 'missing' objects.
These differences in vision have important implications throughout our lives. Car insurance statistics, for
40

instance, show female drivers are less likely to be hit
from the side in an accident at an intersection than male
drivers. Women's greater peripheral vision allows them
to see traffic approaching from the side. They are more
likely to be hit in the front or back of the car while
attempting to reverse parallel park, as that challenges
their less-developed spatial skills.
A woman's life is much less stressful when she understands the problems men have seeing things at close
range. When a woman tells a man, 'It's in the cupboard!' it is less stressful for him to believe her and
continue the search.

Men and Ogling
Wider peripheral vision is the reason why women rarely
get caught ogling men.
Almost every man has been accused at some time or
other of ogling the opposite sex, but few women receive
the same complaint from men. Sex researchers everywhere report that women look at men's bodies as much
as, and sometimes more than, men look at women's.
Yet women, with their superior peripheral vision, rarely
get caught.

Seeing is Believing
Most people won't believe something until they see
the proof - but can you trust your eyes? Millions
believe in UFOs despite the fact that 92% of all
UFO sightings are in remote country areas on Saturday
nights around eleven o'clock - just after the pubs close.
There has never been a UFO sighting by a Prime
Minister or President and UFOs never land on a
41

University Campus, Government research laboratory
or Parliament. And they never land in bad weather.
Researcher Edward Boring devised the following
illustration to show how we each perceive different
things in the same picture. Women are more likely to
see an old woman with her chin tucked into the collar
of her fur coat but men are more likely to see the leftside profile of a young woman who is looking away.

The picture of the table also shows that what you see is
not necessarily what you get.
Your brain is fooled into believing that the far side of
the table is longer than the front side. Women are
usually amused by this, but men demand proof and
grab a ruler to measure it.

In the picture above your brain focuses on the solid
colour so it looks like a group of odd shapes. When you
change the way you look at it and concentrate on the
42

white portions the word FLY will appear. A woman is
more likely to see FLY than a man as his brain gets
stuck on the geometric shapes.
Why Men Should Drive at Night
While a woman can see better in the dark than a man,
especially at the red end of the spectrum, a man's eyes
allow for better long-distance vision over a narrower
field, which gives him much better - and therefore safer long-distance night vision than a woman. Combined
with his right brain spatial ability, a man can separate
and identify the movement of other vehicles on the road
ahead and behind. Most women can testify to what is a
kind of night blindness: the inability to distinguish which
side of the road approaching traffic is on. This is a task
that a man's hunting vision is equipped to handle. This
means that if you are going on a long driving trip, it
makes sense for a woman to drive during the day and for
a man to drive at night. Women can see more detail in
the dark than men but only over a shorter, wider field.

On long trips, men should drive at
night and women drive in the day.
Men suffer greater eyestrain than women because their
eyes are configured for long distances and must be constantly readjusted to look at a computer screen or read
a newspaper. A woman's eyes are better suited for closerange activities, giving her a longer working time on
fine detail. In addition, her brain is wired for coordinated fine-motor capability in a small area, which
means the average woman is excellent at threading a
needle and reading detail on a computer screen.
43

Why Women Have a 'Sixth Sense'
For centuries women were burned at the stake for possessing 'supernatural powers'. These included the ability
to predict outcomes of relationships, spot liars, talk to
animals and uncover the truth.
In 1978, we conducted an experiment for a television
programme which highlighted women's ability to read
the body language signals of babies. At a maternity
hospital, we collated a selection of ten-second film clips
of crying babies and asked the mothers to watch the
clips with the sound turned down. This way the
mothers received only visual information.
Most mothers could quickly detect a range of emotions
ranging from hunger and pain to wind or tiredness.
When the fathers did the same test, their success rate was
pitiful - fewer than 10% of fathers could pick more than
two emotions. Even then, we suspect many were
probably guessing. Many fathers would triumphantly
announce, 'The baby wants its mother. ' Most men had
little, if any, ability to decode the differences in baby
cries. We also tested the grandparents to see if age
affected the outcome. Most grandmothers scored 5070% of the mother's score, while many grandfathers
could not even identify their own grandchild!
Our study with identical twins revealed that most
grandfathers were unable to identify each twin individually, whereas most female family members had less
difficulty with this task. In a room of fifty couples it
takes the average woman less than ten minutes to
analyse the relationship between each couple in the
room. When a woman enters a room, her superior
sensory abilities enable her to rapidly identify couples
who are getting on with each other, who's had an
argument, who is making advances on whom and
where the competitive or friendly women are. When a
44

man enters a room, our cameras show a different story.
Men scan the room looking for exits and entries - his
ancient brainwiring evaluates where a potential attack
may come from and possible escape routes. Next, he
looks for familiar faces or possible enemies and then
scans the room layout. His logical mind will register
things that need to be fixed or repaired such as broken
windows or a blown light bulb. Meanwhile, the women
have scanned all the faces in the room and know what's
what, who's who and how they are all feeling.

Why Men Can't Lie to Women
Our Body Language research reveals that, in face-to-face
communications, non-verbal signals account for 60-80%
of the impact of the message, while vocal sounds make up
20-30%. The other 7-10% is words. A woman's
superior sensory equipment picks up and analyses this
information and her brain's ability to rapidly transfer
between hemispheres makes her more proficient at integrating and deciphering verbal, visual and other signals.
This is why most men have difficulty lying to a
woman face-to-face. But, as most women know, lying
to a man face-to-face is comparatively easy, as he does
not have the necessary sensitivity to spot incongruencies between her verbal and non-verbal signals. Most
men, if they're going to lie to a woman, would be far
better off doing it over the phone, in a letter or with all
the lights off, and a blanket over their head.

She Hears Better Too...
Women hear better than men and are excellent at distinguishing high-pitched sounds. A woman's brain is
45

programmed to hear a baby cry in the night, whereas a
father may be oblivious to it and sleep on. If there is a
kitten crying in the distance, a woman will hear it. A
man, however, with his superior spatial and directional
skills, can tell her where it is.

Dripping taps drive women
crazy, while men sleep.
At one week, baby girls can distinguish their mother's
voice or the cry of another baby from the other sounds
that are present in the same room. Baby boys can't.
Males use their left brain only for listening but females
use both brains for this task. The female brain has the
ability to separate and categorise sound and make
decisions about each sound. This accounts for a
woman's ability to listen to one person in a face-to-face
conversation while monitoring another person's conversation. It also explains why a man has difficulty hearing
a conversation while there is a television on in the background or dishes are being clattered in the sink. If a
phone rings, a man will demand people stop talking,
music is turned down and the TV is switched off for him
to answer it. A woman simply answers the phone.

Women Read Between the Lines
Women have superior sensitivity in differentiating tone
changes in voice volume and pitch. This enables them
to hear emotional changes in children and adults.
Consequently, for every man who can sing in tune,
there are eight women who can do it. This ability goes
a long way to explaining the women's phrase, 'Don't
use that tone of voice with me!' when arguing with men
46

and boys. Most males don't have a clue what she's
talking about.
Tests conducted on babies reveal that baby girls
respond almost twice as much to a loud sound than
boys. This explains why girls are more easily soothed
and comforted by high-pitched baby talk than boys,
and why mothers intuitively sing lullabies to girls, but
talk to, or play with, boys. Female hearing advantage
contributes significantly to what is called 'Women's
Intuition' and is one of the reasons why a woman can
read between the lines of what people say. Men,
however, shouldn't despair. They are excellent at identifying and imitating animal sounds, which would have
been a significant advantage for the ancient hunter.
Sadly, that's not quite as much use today.

Men Can 'Hear' Direction
Women are better at differentiating sounds but men can
point to where they're coming from. Combined with the
male ability to identify and imitate animal sounds, this
skill makes him a highly efficient hunter of game. So
how does sound get converted in the brain into a map?
Professor Masakazu Konishi of the California Institute of
Technology discovered some of the answers using barn
owls, birds that are better than humans at pinpointing
where a sound is coming from. Play them a sound and
they will turn their heads to face its source. Konishi
discovered a group of cells in the auditory region of their
brains that mapped the exact location of a sound.
Speakers that played the same sound to each of the owls'
ears at a different rate of speed - about 200 millionths of
a second - allowed the owls' brains to form a 3D spatial
map of the sound's location. The owls then turned their
heads towards the sound, allowing them to
47

locate prey or avoid approaching enemies. This appears
to be the same ability that men use to pinpoint sound.

Why Boys Don't Listen
Boys are often chastised by their teachers and parents
for not listening. But as boys grow, particularly
approaching puberty, their ear canals undergo growth
spurts that can cause a temporary form of deafness.
Female teachers have been found to reprimand girls differently to boys and seem intuitively to understand
male and female hearing differences.
If a girl refuses to keep eye contact while the teacher
berates her, a female teacher will continue the
reprimand. If a boy refuses eye contact, many female
teachers intuitively understand that he probably either
can't hear or is not listening, and will say, 'Look at me
when I speak to you'. Unfortunately, boys are equipped
for effective seeing rather than hearing. For an easy
demonstration of this, just count the number of Fs in
the following sentence.

Finished files are the result of
years of scientific research.
Boys score better than girls at seeing that there are five
F's. If the statement is read aloud however, girls are
better than boys at hearing the correct number of F's.

Men Miss the Details
Lyn and Chris are driving home from a party. He's
driving, she's navigating and they've just had an argu48

ment about her telling him to turn left when she really
meant right. Nine minutes of silence has passed and he
suspects something is up. 'Darling... is everything OK?'
asks Chris. 'Yes - everything's fine!" Lyn answers.
Her emphasis on the word 'fine' confirms that things
are actually far from fine. He thinks back to the party.
'Did I do something wrong tonight?' asks Chris. 'I don't
want to talk about it!' she snaps.
This means she's angry and does want to talk about
it. Meanwhile, he's at a complete loss to understand
what he's done to upset her. 'Please tell me. What did I
do?' he pleads. 'I don't know what I did!'
In most conversations like this one, the man is
telling the truth - he simply doesn't understand the
problem. 'OK then, ' she says, 'I'll tell you the problem
even though you're playing that stupid act!' But it's
not an act. He genuinely doesn't have a handle on
the problem. She takes a deep breath. 'That bimbo
was hanging around you all night giving you comeon signals and you didn't get rid of her - you encouraged her!'
Now Chris is completely dumbstruck. What bimbo?
What come-on signals? He didn't see anything. You see,
while the 'bimbo' (this is a woman's expression; men
would describe a woman like that as 'sexy') had been
talking to him, he hadn't noticed that she was tilting her
pelvis at him, pointing her foot his way, flicking her
hair, stroking her thigh, massaging her earlobes, giving
him longer than usual glances, stroking the stem of her
wine glass and talking like a schoolgirl. He's a hunter.
He can spot a zebra on the horizon and tell you how
fast it's moving. He doesn't have a woman's ability to
pick up the visual, vocal and body language signals that
say someone's on the make. Every woman at the party
saw what the 'bimbo' was doing even without moving
their heads. And a telepathic 'bitch alert' was sent and
49

received by all other women at the party. Most of the
men missed it completely.
So when a man claims he is telling the truth about
these accusations, he probably is. Male brains are not
equipped to hear or see details.

The Magic of Touch
Touch can be life-giving. Early tests conducted on
monkeys by Harlow and Zimmerman showed that lack
of touch on infant monkeys resulted in depression,
illness and premature death. Similar results have been
found in neglected children. An impressive study on
babies from ten weeks of age to six months, found that
the offspring of mothers who were taught to stroke
their babies had dramatically fewer colds and sniffles,
and less vomiting and diarrhoea than those whose
mothers didn't stroke them. Other research found that
women who were neurotic or depressed recovered
much more quickly according to the number of times
they were hugged, and the duration of those hugs.
Anthropologist James Prescott, who pioneered the
study of child-rearing and violence, found that societies
in which children were rarely touched affectionately, had
the highest rates of adult violence. Children brought up
with affectionate carers usually ended up growing into
better, healthier and happier adults. Sex offenders and
child molesters both tended to have pasts characterised
by rejection, violence, a lack of cuddles as children, and
childhoods, often, spent in remote institutions. Many
non-touching cultures love cats and dogs as they allow
them to experience touch via stroking and patting their
pets. Pet-patting therapy has proved to be a valuable way
of helping people overcome depression and other mental
problems. Just look at how the English, the very
50

antipathy of a touchy-feely race, love their pets. As
Germaine Greer said, 'Even crushed against his brother
in the Tube the average Englishman pretends desperately
that he is alone. '

Women Are Touchy-Feely
The skin is the largest organ in the body, measuring
around two square metres. Distributed unevenly across
it are 2, 800, 000 receptors for pain, 200, 000 for cold,
and 500, 000 for touch and pressure. From birth, girls
are dramatically more sensitive to touch and, as an
adult, a woman's skin is at least ten times more
sensitive to touch and pressure than a man's. In one
authoritative study it was found that the boys who
tested most sensitive to touch felt even less than the
least sensitive girls. Female skin is thinner than male
skin and has an extra fat layer below it for more
warmth in winter and to provide greater endurance.
Oxytocin is the hormone that stimulates the urge to
be touched and fires up our touch receptors. It's no
wonder that women, with receptors that are ten times
more sensitive than men's, attach so much importance
to cuddling their men, children and friends. Our body
language research shows that western women are four
to six times more likely to touch another woman in a
social conversation than a man is likely to touch
another man. Women use a greater range of touch
expressions than men, describing a successful person as
having a 'magic touch' and others as being 'thinskinned' or 'thick-skinned'. Women love 'staying in
touch' and dislike those who 'get under your skin'.
They talk about 'feelings', giving someone 'the personal
touch', being 'touchy' and annoying people by 'rubbing
them up the wrong way'. In 1999, a research team led
51

by Michael Meaney at McGill University in Quebec,
Canada, showed baby rats that are constantly groomed
and cared for by their parents develop more brain mass
and higher intelligence than baby rats who had less
caring parents.
A study with psychiatric patients showed that, under
pressure, men avoid touch and retreat into their own
world. More than half the women in the same test, on
the other hand, initiated approaches to men, not for
sex, but for the intimacy of touch. When a woman is
emotionally cut off or angry with a man, she is likely to
respond by saying, 'Don't touch me!', a phrase that has
little meaning to men. The lesson? To win points with
women, use lots of appropriate touching but avoid
groping. To raise mentally healthy children, cuddle
them a lot.

A woman is four to six times more likely
to touch another woman in a social conversation than a man would another man.
Why Men Are So Thick-Skinned
Men have thicker skin than women which explains why
women get more wrinkles than men. The skin on a
man's back is four times thicker than his stomach skin,
a legacy from his four-legged animal past which gave
more protection from a rear attack. Most of a boy's
sensitivity to touch is lost by the time he reaches
puberty and his body prepares itself for the rigours of
the hunt. Males needed desensitised skin to run through
prickly bushes, wrestle animals and fight enemies
without the pain slowing them down. When a man is
52

focused on a physical task or sporting activity, he is
unlikely even to be aware of injury.

A boy doesn't really lose skin sensitivity at
puberty, it just all goes to one area.
When a man is not focused on a task, his threshold of
pain is much lower than a woman's. When a man
moans, 'Make me some chicken soup/fresh orange
juice/get me a hot water bottle/call the doctor, and make
sure my Will is in order!', it usually means he's got a
slight head cold. Men are also less sensitive to a woman
who is suffering pain or discomfort. If she's doubled up
in pain, has a temperature of 104 degrees and is
shivering under the blankets he says, 'Is everything OK
darling?' but he's thinking, 'If I ignore it, maybe she'll
have sex - she's in bed anyway. '
Men do feel sensitivity when watching football or
aggressive sports, however. If men are watching a
boxing match on TV and one of the boxers is felled by
a low blow a woman will say, 'Oooh... that must have
hurt' while the men all groan, double over and actually
feel the pain.

A Taste for Life
Women's senses of taste and smell are superior to men's.
We have up to 10, 000 taste receptors to detect at least
four major tastes; sweet and salt on the tip of the
tongue, sour on the sides and bitter at the back.
Japanese researchers are currently testing a fifth taste the taste of fat. Men score higher on discerning salt and
bitter tastes which is why they drink beer, and women
are far superior in discerning sweet and sugar tastes,
53

which is why there are far more female chocoholics in
the world than male. As the nest-defender and fruitgatherer, tasting foods to check they were sweet and
ripe enough to pass on to her brood, it was an
advantage to have a highly refined sugar-tasting palate.
This explains why women love sugary sweets and why
most food tasters are women.

Something in the Air
Not only is a woman's sense of smell better than the
average man's, it is even more sensitive around the
ovulation stage of her monthly cycle. Her nose can
detect the pheromones and musk-like odours associated
with men and these are scents that cannot be
detected consciously. Her brain is able to decode the
state of a man's immune system and, if it's complementary to, or stronger than her own immune system, she
may describe a man as attractive or 'strangely
magnetic'. If her immune system is stronger than his,
she is likely to find him less attractive.
Brain researchers have discovered that a woman's
brain can analyse these immune system differences
within three seconds of a meeting. Complementary
immune systems pass on an advantage to offspring by
giving them a greater chance of survival. One outcome of
all this research has been the number of oils and potions
now being marketed for men that supposedly contain the
secret of surefire pheromone attraction, driving women
wild with desire.

A strong immune system can make
a man seem 'strangely compelling'.
54

The X-Philes
Our evolutionary roles have equipped us with the biological skills and senses we need for survival. What is
often called witchcraft, supernatural power and
women's intuition has been scientifically tested and
measured since the 1980s and, for the most part, comes
down to a woman's superiority in all the perceptive
senses. Most witches were women who were put to
death by men who could not understand the biological
differences. Women are simply better at picking up the
small nuances in body language, vocal cues, tone of
voice and other sensory stimuli. They can also read
attitudes and emotions in animals. This allowed ancient
women to determine whether or not an animal
approaching her nest was dangerous or friendly. A
woman can even tell if a dog is feeling embarrassed or if
a horse is about to kick. Most men cannot imagine what
an embarrassed dog looks like. Women counsel cats.
When women are not looking, men kick cats.
For nest-defending women, being dextrous with both
hands would have been an advantage to the process of
gathering as it gives twice the speed. Consequently,
many women do not have a specific area in either brain
for identifying left from right - it was never necessary.
This is why there are disproportionately more ambidextrous women than men. It also explains why women
everywhere are unfairly criticised by men who, frustrated at being given wrong directions by a woman,
yell, 'Don't you even know your left from right!' The
correct answer is 'no'- a dominant right hand is vital to
target-hitting, but not critical to fast gathering. Because
of their superior abilities in this area, modern women
are still victimised by their attraction to astrologers,
psychics, tarot card readers, numerologists and others
who offer an explanation for female intuition in
55

exchange for hard-earned money. A woman's highly
refined sensors contribute significantly to the early
maturity of adolescent girls. By the age of seventeen,
most girls can function as adults, while the boys are still
giving each other wedgies at the swimming pool and
lighting farts.
Why Men Are Called 'Insensitive'
It's not so much that women have super senses - it's
more that men's senses have been dulled, comparatively
speaking. In a woman's world of higher perceptiveness,
she expects a man to read her verbal, vocal and body
language signals and to anticipate her needs, just as
another woman would do. For the evolutionary reasons
discussed, this simply is not the case. A woman quietly
assumes that a man will know what she wants or needs
and, when he doesn't pick up on her cues, she accuses
him of being, 'Insensitive - wouldn't have a clue!' Men
everywhere bleat, 'Am I supposed to be a mindreader?'
Research proves that men are poor mindreaders. But the
good news is that most can be trained to improve their
awareness of non-verbal and vocal messages.
The next chapter has a unique test that will show you
the sexual orientation of your brain and why you are the
way you are.

56

CHAPTER 3

IT'S ALL IN THE MIND

57

hese lighthearted illustrations of the male and
female brain are funny only because they contain
such an element of truth. But how much? Well, more
than you might think. In this chapter we'll
examine the recent dramatic revelations from research
into the brain.
You'll find this chapter a real eye -opener, and at
the end we have included a simple but remarkable
test to show you just why your brain behaves the way
it does.

T

58

Why We're Smarter than the Rest
Look at the following drawings and you'll notice two
striking differences between gorillas, Neanderthal man
and us modern humans. Firstly, our brain is more than
three times the size of the gorilla's and one-third bigger
than our primitive ancestor's. Fossil evidence shows
that our brain has remained about the same size for the
last 50, 000 years and there has been little change in our
brain functions. Secondly, we have a protruding
forehead which our fore-fathers and primate cousins
lacked. The forehead contains the left and right frontal
brain lobes which give us many of our unique abilities
such as thinking, map reading and speech. This is what
makes us superior to all other animals.

Men and women's brains have evolved with different
strengths, talents and abilities. Men, being responsible
for hunting game, needed areas in the brain for longdistance navigation, to develop tactics for organising
the kill and to hone skills for hitting a target. They
didn't need to be good conversationalists or sensitive
to anyone's emotional needs, so they never developed
strong brain areas for interpersonal skills.
Women, by contrast, needed an aptitude for good
short-range navigation, wider peripheral vision to
59

monitor their surroundings, the ability to perform
several activities simultaneously, and effective communication skills. As a consequence of these needs, men
and women's brains developed specific areas to handle
each skill.
In today's terms, ancient society was very sexist but
we'll tackle this issue later.

How Our Brains Defend Territory
'Old habits die hard, ' say the old folks. 'Genetic
memory is alive and operating, ' say the scientists.
Genetic memory is part of our instinctive behaviour.
Naturally, you'd expect tens of thousands of years
sitting in a cave facing outwards to monitor surroundings, defend territory and solve the myriad problems of
survival, to leave quite a mark on men.
Just look at them in a restaurant. Most men prefer to sit
with their backs to the wall, facing the restaurant
entrance. This makes them feel comfortable, secure and
alert. No one's going to sneak up on them unobserved,
even if it is, these days, with nothing more lethal than a
particularly hefty bill. Women, on the other hand, don't
mind having their backs to an open space, unless they are
alone with young children, when they'll tend to take a
seat next to the wall.
At home, men will also act instinctively, by taking the
side of the bed closest to the bedroom door - the
symbolic act of defending the cave entrance. If a couple
moves to a new home or stays in a hotel where the door
is on the woman's side of the bed, a man can feel
restless and may have difficulty sleeping without ever
knowing why. Changing places so that he is once again
closest to the door can often solve the problem.
60

Men joke that they sleep by the door
of their first marital home for a
quick getaway. In truth, it's
pure defender instinct.
When a man is away from home, a woman will
generally assume his protective role and sleep on his
side of the bed. At night, a woman can be aroused from
a deep sleep immediately by a high-pitched sound, like
a baby's cry. Men, to women's great annoyance, will
snore on soundly. But his brain is wired to hear sounds
associated with movement and even the sound of a twig
breaking outside his window can bring him wide awake
in a split second to defend against a possible attack.
This time, women will sleep on - except when the man
is away and her brain becomes programmed to assume
his role, and hear every sound or movement threatening
the nest.

The Brains Behind Success
The Greek philosopher Aristotle believed that the
centre for thought lay in the heart while the brain
helped cool the body. This is why the heart is the object
of many of our expressions of emotion. It may seem
ridiculous to us now, but many experts, as recently as
the late 19th Century, still agreed with Aristotle.
In 1962 Roger Sperry won a Nobel Prize for identifying
that the two hemispheres of the brain's cerebral cortex
are responsible for separate intellectual functions.
Advanced technology is now allowing us to see how the
brain operates, but our real understanding
61

of brain function is still very basic. We know that the
right hemisphere, which is the creative side, controls the
left side of the body, while the left hemisphere controls
logic, reason, speech and the body's right side. The left
brain is where language and vocabulary are located,
particularly for men, and the right brain stores and
controls visual information.
People who are left-handed have a bias towards the
right hemisphere, which is the creative side of the brain.
It is for this reason that there is such a disproportionate
number of left-handers who are artistic geniuses,
including Albert Einstein, Leonardo Da Vinci, Picasso,
Lewis Carroll, Greta Garbo, Robert De Niro and Paul
McCartney. There are more left-handed women than
men and 90% of all people are right-handed. Most men
are very capable with their right arm and hand but are
not as good with their left. For males, the right arm
needs to be accurate at throwing objects at a moving
target and to defend the front of the body from attack.
This right-handedness for men appears to be located
somewhere in the genes and explains why, if a man is
going to attack, more than 90% of the time his first
move will be a right side, over-arm blow.

Tests show that women rate
three percent higher in general
intelligence than men.
Until the 1960s, most of the data collected on the human
brain came from soldiers killed on the battlefields - and
there were plenty of candidates to work on. The problem
was, however, that most of these were males and the
silent assumption was that female brains operated in the
same way.
62

Today, latest research reveals that the female brain
operates significantly differently to the male brain.
Therein lies the source of most of the problems in relationships between the sexes. The female brain is slightly
smaller than the male brain but studies show this to
have no significance on a woman's brain performance.
In 1997 Danish researcher Bente Pakkenberg of the
Neurology Department of Copenhagen Municipal
Hospital demonstrated that, on average, a man has
around four billion more brain cells than a woman but,
generally, women test around 3% higher in general
intelligence than men. In 1999, brain researcher
Professor Ruben Gur of the University of Pennsylvania
Medical Centre discovered that women have more grey
matter than men. Grey matter is where the brain does
its computational work and makes women better communicators than men.

'It's obvious that women are
smarter than men. Think about
it - diamonds are a girl's best friend;
man's best friend is a dog. '
Joan Rivers

What's Where in the Brain?
Here is a commonly held view of which side of the
brain controls which function.
While research and our understanding of the human
brain is increasing dramatically every day, there are
varying interpretations of the research results. But there
63

are several areas on which scientists and researchers do
agree. Using Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),
which measures electrical activity in the brain, it is now
possible to identify and measure the exact location of
many specific functions in the brain. With brainscanning equipment, we can see which part of the brain
is handling a particular task. When a brain scan shows
a specific location for a skill or function, it means that
the person will usually be good at performing that skill,
that they enjoy doing it and are attracted to occupations and pursuits that allow them to use it.

For example, most men have a specific brain location
for sensing direction so they find that easy to do. They
enjoy planning directions and are drawn to pursuits
and pastimes that allow them to use abilities such as
navigation and orientation. Women have specific areas
for speech. They're good at it, can do it with ease and
are attracted to fields that allow them to make use of
this strength, such as therapy, counselling and teaching.
Where there is no clear brain location for a certain skill
it usually means that a person is not naturally good at,
or does not particularly enjoy, tasks that make use of
64

that skill. This is why it's as hard to locate female navigators as it is to find solace in a male counsellor, or
learn 'proper' English from a male language teacher.

Where Brain Research Began
The first recorded scientific tests into differences
between the sexes were held at the Museum of London
by Francis Galton in 1882. He found that men had
better sensitivity to 'bright' sounds - shrill or highpitched noises - had a stronger hand grip and were less
sensitive to pain than women. At the same time, in
America, a similar study found that men preferred red
to blue, had a larger vocabulary and preferred solving
technical problems to domestic ones. Women could
hear more acutely, used more words than men and
preferred working on individual tasks and problems.
Early research into the specific location of brain
functions came from brain-damaged patients. It was
found that men who suffered injury to the left side of
the brain had lost much or all of their speech and
vocabulary skills, whereas women who were similarly
brain-damaged did not suffer speech loss to the
same extent, indicating that women have more than
one centre for speech.
Men were three to four times more likely to suffer
speech losses or speech impediments than women, and
were much less likely to ever regain these skills. If a
man is injured on the left side of the head, he stands a
chance of becoming mute. If a woman is hit in the same
place, she'll probably keep right on talking.
Men with brain damage on the right side lost most or
all of their spatial skills - the ability to think in three
dimensions and to rotate objects in the mind to picture
how they look from different angles. For example, an
65

architectural plan of a house is seen two-dimensionally
by a female brain, whereas a male brain can see it threedimensionally, that is, men can see depth. Most men
can see how a building would look as a finished house.
Women who were brain-damaged in the exact same
place on the right suffered little to no change to their
spatial skills.
Doreen Kimura, Professor of Psychology at the
University of Western Ontario, found that speech
disorders occur in men when the left side only of the
brain is damaged, but only occur in women when the
frontal lobe of either hemisphere is damaged. Stuttering
is a speech defect that is almost entirely restricted to
males and there are three to four times as many boys as
girls in remedial reading classes. Put simply, males have
limited abilities when it comes to speech and conversation. This result won't surprise most women. History
books show that men's lack of talk and conversation
has been making women tear their hair out for
thousands of years.

How the Brain is Analysed
Since the early 1990s, brain-scanning equipment has
developed to the point where it is now possible to see
your brain operating live on a television screen using
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scans and
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Marcus Raichle of
Washington University's School of Medicine measured
specific areas of increased metabolism in the brain to
pinpoint the exact areas that are used for specific skills
and these are shown here.
At Yale University in 1995, a team of scientists led by
Drs Bennett and Shaywitz conducted tests on men and
women to establish which part of the brain is used to
66

Specific hot spots in the brain using MRI

match rhyming words. Using MRI to detect minor
changes in blood flow to different parts of the brain,
they confirmed that men used mainly the left brain
for speech tasks while women used both left and right.
These experiments and countless others carried out
since the 90s all clearly show the same result: men and
women's brains operate differently.
Research also shows that the left side of a girl's brain
develops more rapidly than that of a boy, which means
she'll speak sooner and better than her brother, read
earlier, and learn a foreign language more quickly. It
also explains why speech pathologists are booked solid
for treatment on little boys.

Ask men and women if their brains
work differently. Men will say they think
they do, in fact there was something they
were reading on the Internet the other
day... Women will say, of
course they do - next question?
67

Boys, however, develop the right side of their brain
faster than girls, giving them better spatial, logical and
perceptual skills. Boys excel at mathematics, building,
puzzles, and problem-solving, and master these much
earlier than girls.
It may be fashionable to pretend that the differences
between the sexes are minimal or irrelevant, but the
facts simply do not support that view. Unfortunately,
we now live in a social environment that insists we are
the same - despite the mountain of evidence showing
we are wired differently and have evolved with dramatically varying inbuilt capabilities and inclinations.

Why Women Are Better Connected
The left and right brain hemispheres are connected by a
bundle of nerve fibres called the corpus callosum. This
cable lets both sides of the brain communicate and
exchange information.
Try to imagine you have two computers on your
shoulders with an interface cable between the two. That
cable is the corpus callosum.
Neurologist Roger Gorski of the University of
California at Los Angeles confirmed that a woman's
brain has a thicker corpus callosum than a man's, with
women having up to 30% more connections between
the left and right. He also proved that men and women
use different parts of the brain when working on the
same task. These findings have since been duplicated by
other scientists elsewhere.
Research also reveals that the female hormone oestrogen
prompts nerve cells to grow more connections within the
brain and between the two hemispheres. Studies show
the more connections you have, the more fluent your
speech. It also explains women's ability to multi-track
68

unrelated activities and throws a great deal of light on
women's intuition. As we have discussed, a woman has a
greater range of sensory equipment and, with that multiplicity of fibre connections for faster transfer of information between the hemispheres, it's no wonder a
woman can make so many fast, accurate judgements
about people and situations on an intuitive level.
Why Men Can Only Do One Thing at
a Time!
All the available research agrees: men's brains are specialised. Compartmentalised. A male brain is configured to concentrate on one specific, dedicated task at
once and most men will tell you they can only do 'one
thing at a time'. When a man stops his car to read a
street directory, what's the first thing he does with his
radio? He turns it down! Most women can't understand why this happens. She can read while listening
and talking so why can't he? Why does he insist on
69

turning down the TV when the telephone rings? 'When
he's reading the newspaper or watching TV, why can't
he hear what I've just told him?' is a lament that has
been made by every woman in the world at some time.
The answer is that a man's brain is configured for one
thing at a time because of fewer connecting fibres
between the left and right hemispheres, and a more
compartmentalised brain. Take a brain scan of his head
when he's reading, and you'll find he is virtually deaf.
A woman's brain is configured for multi-tasking performance. She can do several unrelated things at the
same time, and her brain is never disengaged, it's
always active. She can talk on a telephone, at the same
time as cooking a new recipe and watching television.
Or she can drive a car, put on make-up and listen to the
radio while talking on a hands-free telephone. But if a
man is cooking a recipe and you talk to him, he is likely
to become angry because he can't follow the written
instructions and listen at the same time. If a man is
shaving and you talk to him he'll cut himself. Most
women will have had the experience of being accused
by a man of making him miss a turn-off on the highway
because she was chatting to him at the time. One
woman told us that if she is angry with her husband,
she talks to him while he is hammering a nail!
Because women use both sides of their brains, many
find it more difficult to tell their left hand from their
right. Around 50% of women cannot instantly
recognise which is which, without looking for a ring or
a freckle first. Men, on the other hand, operating in
either the left or right brain, find it much easier to
identify left from right. As a result, women all over the
world everywhere are criticised by men for telling them
to turn right - when they really meant left.

70

Try the Toothbrush Test
Most women can brush their teeth while walking
and talking on several topics. They can make up-anddown strokes with the toothbrush at the same time
as polishing a table using a circular movement with
the other hand. Most men find this very difficult, if not
impossible.
When men brush their teeth, their mono-tracked
brain means they focus entirely on that single
task. They all stand square to the basin, feet
30cm apart, body bent over the sink, moving their head
back and forth against the brush, usually to the speed
of the water.
Why We Are Who We Are
At a time when we are raising boys and girls as if
they are identical, science is proving they are dramatically different in their thinking. The conclusion that
neurologists and brain researchers everywhere
have now reached is that we are who we are because
of hormones.

We are who we are because of hormones.
We are all the result of our chemistry.
Late 20th Century thinking says we are born with
an empty mind and our parents, teachers and environment dictate our attitudes and choices. New research
into the brain and its development now reveals that our
minds are configured like a computer at around six to
eight weeks after conception. Our basic 'operating
system' is in place and several 'programmes' are also
71

installed so that when we are born we come prepackaged, like a computer with an array of add-on
hardware and software.
Science also shows that the basic operating system
and its wiring leave little room for change. Our environment and our teachers can only add data and run
compatible programmes. And, up until now, there have
been practically no 'How to' manuals available. This
means that when we are born, our future choices and
sexuality preferences are pre-set. Nature versus
nurture? It's a done deal. Nature had the headstart from
the very beginning. We now know that nurturing is a
learned behaviour, with adoptive mothers proving just
as effective at nurturing children as biological mothers.

Programming the Foetus
Almost all of us are made up of 46 chromosomes which
are like genetic building blocks or a blueprint. Twentythree come from our mother and 23 from our father. If
our mother's 23rd chromosome is an X chromosome
(it's shaped like an X) and if the father's 23rd is also an
X, the result is called an XX baby, which is a girl. If the
father's 23rd chromosome is a Y chromosome, we'll get
an XY baby which will be a boy. The basic template for
the human body and brain is female - we all start out
as girls - and this is why men have female features such
as nipples and mammary glands.
At the six to eight week point after conception, the
foetus is more or less sexless and has the potential to
develop either male or female genitalia.
German scientist Dr Gunther Dorner, a leading pioneer
in social science, was one of the first to advance the
theory that our sexual identity is formed six to eight
weeks after conception. His research showed that if the
72

foetus is a genetic boy (XY) it develops special cells that
direct large amounts of male hormones, particularly
testosterone, through the body to form male testes and
configure the brain for masculine traits and behaviours,
such as long-distance vision and the spatial skills for
throwing, hunting and chasing.
Let's say that a male foetus (XY) needs at least one
unit of male hormone to form male genitals and
another three units to configure the brain with a male
operating system but, for reasons we will discuss later,
it does not receive the required dosage. Let's say it
needs four units but receives only three. The first unit is
used to form the male genitals but the brain receives
only two more units which means that the brain
becomes sexed two-thirds male and remains one-third
female. The result is that a baby boy is born who will
grow up to become a person with a mainly male brain,
but with some female thinking patterns and abilities. If
the male foetus only receives, say, two units of male
hormone, one is used for testes formation and the brain
gets only one instead of the required three. Now we
have a baby whose brain is still mainly female in
structure and thinking, but it is in a genetically male
body. By the time puberty arrives, this boy is likely to
be homosexual. We'll discuss how this happens in
Chapter 8.
When the foetus is a girl (XX), little or no male
hormone is present and so the body forms female
genitalia and the brain's template remains female. The
brain is further configured with female hormones and
develops nest-defending attributes, including the
centres for being able to decode verbal and non-verbal
signals. When the baby girl is born, she looks female
and her behaviour will be feminine as a result of her
female-wired brain. But occasionally, usually by
accident, the female foetus receives a significant dose of
73

male hormone and the result is a baby girl born with,
to a greater or lesser extent, a masculine brain. We will
also discuss how this happens in Chapter 8.
It is estimated that about 80% to 85% of males have
mainly male-wired brains and about 15% to 20% have
brains that are feminised to a greater or lesser extent.
Many of these in the latter group become gay.

Fifteen to twenty percent of men have
feminised brains. About ten percent of
women have masculinised brains.
Any references to female gender in this book will refer
to approximately 90% of girls and women whose
brains are wired for mainly female behaviour. Around
10% of women have a brain that is wired, to a greater
or lesser extent, with some masculine abilities because
it received a dose of male hormone six to eight weeks
after conception.
Here is a simple but fascinating test that can show
you the extent to which your brain is wired for
masculine or feminine thinking. The questions have
been collated from many leading studies into human
brain sexuality and the rating system used was
developed by British geneticist Anne Moir. There are no
right or wrong answers in this test, but it gives you
some interesting insights into why you make the choices
you make and think the way you do. At the end of the
test you can score your result on the chart. Photocopy
the test and give it to those you live and work with, and
the result will be a real eye-opener for everyone.

74

The Brain-Wiring Test
This test is designed to indicate the masculinity or
femininity of your brain patterns. There are no right or
wrong answers - the result is simply an indication of the
probable level of male hormone your brain did, or did
not, receive around six to eight weeks after your
conception. This is reflected in your preference of values,
behaviours, style, orientations and choices.
Circle the statement that is most likely to be true
for you most of the time.

1. When it comes to reading a map or street
directory you:
a. have difficulty and often ask for help
b. turn it round to face the direction you're
going
c. have no difficulty reading maps or street
directories
2. You're cooking a complicated meal with the
radio playing and a friend phones. Do you:
a. leave the radio on and continue cooking
while talking on the phone
b. turn the radio off, talk and keep cooking
c. say you'll call them back as soon as you've
finished cooking

75

3. Friends are coming to visit and ask for
directions to your new house. Do you:
a. draw a map with clear directions and send it
to them or get someone else to explain how
to get there
b. ask what landmarks they know then try to
explain to them how to get there
c. explain verbally how to get there: 'Take the
M3 to Newcastle, turn off, turn left, go to
the second traffic lights... '
4. When explaining an idea or concept, are you
more likely to:
a. use a pencil, paper and body language gestures
b. explain it verbally using body language and
gestures
c. explain it verbally, being clear and concise

5. When coming home from a great movie, you
prefer to:
a. picture scenes from the movie in your mind
b. talk about the scenes and what was said
c. quote mainly what was said in the movie
6. In a cinema, you usually prefer to sit:
a. on the right side
b. anywhere
c. on the left side
7. A friend has something mechanical that won't
work. You would:
a. sympathise, and discuss how they feel about it
b. recommend someone reliable who can fix it
c. figure out how it works and attempt to fix it
for them
76

8. You're in an unfamiliar place and someone asks
you where North is. You:
a. confess you don't know
b. guess where it is, after a bit of thought
c. point towards North without difficulty
9. You've found a parking space but it's tight and
you must reverse into it. You would:
a. rather try to find another space
b. carefully attempt to back into it
c. reverse into it without any difficulty.
10. You are watching TV when the telephone rings.
You would:
a. answer the phone with the TV on
b. turn the TV down and then answer
c. turn the TV off, tell others to be quiet and
then answer
11. You've just heard a new song by your favourite
artist. Usually you:
a. can sing some of the song afterwards
without difficulty
b. can sing some of it afterwards if it's a really
simple song
c. find it hard to remember how the song
sounded but you might recall some of the
words
12. You are best at predicting outcomes by:
a. using intuition
b. making a decision based on both the
available information and 'gut feeling'
c. using facts, statistics and data
77

13. You've misplaced your keys. Would you:
a. do something else until the answer comes to
you
b. do something else, but keep trying to
remember where you put them
c. mentally retrace your steps until you
remember where you left them
14. You're in a hotel room and you hear the distant
sound of a siren. You:
a. couldn't identify where it's coming from
b. could probably point to it if you concentrate
c. could point straight to where it's coming
from
15. You go to a social meeting and are introduced
to seven or eight new people. Next day you:
a. can easily picture their faces
b. would remember a few of their faces
c. would be more likely to remember their
names
16. You want to go to the country for your holiday
but your partner wants to go to a beach resort.
To convince them your idea is better, you:
a. tell them sweetly how you feel: you love the
countryside and the kids and family always
have fun there
b. tell them if they go to the country you'll be
grateful and will be happy to go to the beach
next time
c. use the facts: the country resort is closer,
cheaper, and well-organised for sporting and
leisure activities
78

17. When planning your day's activities, you
usually:
a. write a list so you can see what needs to be
done
b. think of the things you need to do
c. picture in your mind the people you will see,
places you will visit and things you'll be
doing
18. A friend has a personal problem and has come
to discuss it with you. You:
a. are sympathetic and understanding
b. say that problems are never as bad as they
seem and explain why
c. give suggestions or rational advice on how to
solve the problem
19. Two friends from different marriages are
having a secret affair. How likely are you to
spot it?
a. you could spot it very early
b. you'd pick up on it half the time
c. you'd probably miss it
20. What is life all about, as you see it?
a. having friends and living in harmony with
those around you
b. being friendly to others while maintaining
personal independence
c. achieving worthwhile goals, earning
others' respect and winning prestige and
advancement

79

21. Given the choice, you would prefer to work:
a. in a team where people are compatible
b. around others but maintaining your own
space
c. by yourself
22. The books you prefer to read are:
a. novels and fiction
b. magazines and newspapers
c. non-fiction, autobiographies
23. When you go shopping you tend to:
a. often buy on impulse, particularly the specials
b. have a general plan but take it as it comes
c. read the labels and compare costs
24. You prefer to go to bed, wake up and eat
meals:
a. whenever you feel like it
b. on a basic schedule but you are flexible
c. at about the same time each day
25. You've started a new job and met lots of new
people on the staff. One of them phones you
when you are at home. You would:
a. find it easy to recognise their voice
b. recognise it about half the time
c. have difficulty identifying the voice
26. What upsets you most when arguing with
someone?
a. their silence or lack of response
b. when they won't see your point of view
c. their probing or challenging questions and
comments
80

27. In school how did you feel about spelling tests
and writing essays?
a. you found them both fairly easy
b. you were generally OK with one but not the
other
c. you weren't very good at either
28. When it comes to dancing or jazz routines, you:
a. can 'feel' the music once you've learnt the
steps
b. can do some exercises or dances, but get lost
with others
c. have difficulty keeping time or rhythm
29. How good are you at identifying and
mimicking animal sounds?
a. not very good
b. reasonable
c. very good

30. At the end of a long day, you usually prefer to:
a. talk to friends or family about your day
b. listen to others talk about their day
c. read a paper, watch TV and not talk
How to Score the Test
First, add the number of A, B and C responses and use
the following table to arrive at your final result.
For Males
Number of A's x 10 points =
Number of B's x 5 points =
Number of C's x -5 points =
Total points =

81

For Females
Number of A's x 15 points =
Number of B's x 5 points =
Number of C's x -5 points =
Total points =

For any questions where the answers didn't accurately reflect your life or you left them blank, award
yourself five points.

Analysing the Result
Most males will score between 0-180 and most
females, 150-300. Brains that are 'wired' for mainly
masculine thinking usually score below 150. The closer
to 0 they are, the more masculine they are, and the
higher their testosterone level is likely to be. These
people demonstrate strong logical, analytical and
verbal skills and tend to be disciplined and wellorganised. The closer to 0 they score, the better they are
at projecting costs and planning outcomes for statistical
data, with their emotions hardly influencing them at all.
Scores in the minus range are high masculine scores.
These scores show that large amounts of testosterone
were present in the early stages of the foetal development. The lower the score for a woman, the more likely
she will be to have lesbian tendencies.
Brains that are wired for mainly feminine thinking
will score higher than 180. The higher the number, the
more feminine the brain will be, and the more likely the
person is to demonstrate significant creative, artistic
and musical talents. They will make more of their
decisions on intuition or gut feeling, and are good at
recognising problems using minimal data. They are also
good at solving problems using creativity and insight.
82

The higher the score is above 180 for a man, the greater
the chance he will be gay.
Males who score below 0 and women who score
above 300 have brains that are wired so oppositely that
the only thing they are likely to have in common is that
they live on the same planet!
Scores between 150-180 show compatibility of
thought for both sexes, or a foot in both sexual camps.
These people do not show a bias for either male or
female thinking and usually demonstrate a flexibility in
thinking that can be a significant advantage to any
group who are going through a problem-solving
process. They have the predisposition to make friends
with both men and women.

A Final Word
Since the beginning of the 1980s, our knowledge of the
brain has surpassed our wildest expectations. US
President George Bush proclaimed the 1990s as the
Decade of the Brain and we have now entered the
Millennium of the Mind. In our discussion of the brain
and its various regions we have simplified neuroscience
to avoid being too technical, but we are also conscious
of not over-simplifying because the brain is a web-like
structure of neurons that form complex assemblies of
brain cells which make up brain regions.
You, the reader, don't want to become a neuroscientist,
you just want a basic understanding of brain function and
some strategies that work when dealing with the opposite
sex. It's easy to pinpoint the area of the brain used for
spatial skill in males and to develop working strategies for
it. It's much more difficult to get a handle on the exact
operation of emotion in the brain. But, even so, we can
still develop workable strategies for dealing with it.
83

The Brain-Wiring Test

84

CHAPTER 4

TALKING
AND
LISTENING

85

B

arbara and Allan were getting ready to go to a
cocktail party. Barbara had bought a new dress
and was anxious to look her best. She held up two
pairs of shoes, one blue, one gold. Then she asked Allan
the question that all men fear, 'Darling, which should
I wear with this dress?'
A cold chill ran down Allan's back. He knew he was
in trouble. 'Ahh... umm... whichever you like sweetheart,
' he stammered. 'Come on Allan, ' she said, impatiently.
'Which looks better... blue or gold?' 'Gold!' he replied,
nervously. 'So, what's wrong with the blue?' she asked.
'You've never liked them! I paid a fortune for them and
you hate them, don't you?'
Allan's shoulders slumped. 'If you don't want my
opinion, Barbara, don't ask!' he said. He thought he'd
been asked to fix a problem but, when he solved it, she
wasn't at all grateful. Barbara, however, was using a
typical female speech trait: indirect speech. She'd already
decided which shoes she was going to wear and didn't
want another opinion on it; she wanted confirmation
that she looked good. In this chapter, we will look at the
problems men and women have communicating with
each other and offer some novel solutions.

The 'Blue or Gold Shoes' Strategy
If a woman asks 'blue or gold?' when selecting shoes,
it's important that a man does not give an answer.
Instead, he should ask, 'Have you chosen a pair,

86

darling?' Most women are taken aback by this
approach because most men they know immediately
state a preference. 'Well... I thought I could possibly
wear the gold... ' she'll say, uncertainly. The reality is,
she has already chosen the gold shoes. 'Why the gold?'
he'll ask. 'Because I'm wearing gold accessories and my
dress has a gold pattern in it, ' she'll respond. A skilled
man would then reply, 'Wow! Great choice! You'll look
fabulous! You've done well! I love it!' And you can bet
he'll have a great night.

Why Males Can't Talk Proper
We've known for thousands of years that men aren't
great conversationalists, particularly when compared to
women. Not only do girls start speaking earlier than
boys but a three-year-old girl has nearly twice the
vocabulary of a three-year-old boy, with her speech
almost 100% comprehensible. Speech pathologists are
kept busy with parents bringing young boys in for
therapy with the same complaint: 'He can't speak
properly. ' If the boy has an older sister, this speech difference is even more noticeable, particularly as older
sisters and mothers frequently talk for their sons. Ask a
five-year-old boy, 'How are you?' and his mother or
sister answers, 'He's fine, thanks'.

Mothers, daughters, and older
sisters often speak on behalf of
the males in their family.
For males, speech and language are not critical brain
skills. They operate mainly in the left brain and have no
87

specific location. Studies with left brain-damaged
people show that most speech disorders in males occur
in the left/rear hemisphere and mainly in the left/front
for females. When a male talks, MRI scans show that
his entire left hemisphere becomes active as it searches
to find a centre for speaking, but is unable to find
much. Consequently, men aren't much good at talking.
The following MRI brain scan is from research
conducted by Dr Tonmoy Sharma, head of cognitive
psychopharmacology at the Institute of Psychiatry,
London, in 1999. As you can see, males have few hot
spots for speech functions.
This demonstrates why boys tend to mumble and
have sloppier pronunciation than girls. They use fillers
like 'um', 'uh' and 'like' during conversation, are more
likely to drop the 'g' from the end of words, saying
comin' and goin', and using only three tones of voice
when speaking, compared to a woman's five tones.
When men get together to watch a football match on
TV, that's exactly what they do - the only conversation
tends to be 'pass the chips' and 'got any more beer?' For
a group of women, meeting up to watch a TV
programme has always been more of an excuse for a
chat. As a result, they'll tend to get together to watch
something like a TV soap, where the characters and the
plots are familiar, rather than a complicated murdermystery drama.

Location of male speech
and language. (Black areas
represent activity. )
Institute of Psychiatry,
London, 1999.

88

The different ways the sexes express themselves is
perhaps nowhere more obvious than in sport. Watch
any TV sporting event and observe how female basketball players, for instance, can describe their match
exactly, succinctly and perfectly comprehensibly. When
male players are interviewed, however, not only is it
difficult to make sense of the little they have to say, but
their mouths don't appear to move. With teenagers, the
difference is remarkable, too. When we asked our
teenage daughter about the party she attended the night
before, she gave an articulate recitation of everything
that happened - who said what to whom, how
everyone felt about it and what they were wearing. Our
teenage son, asked the same question, mumbled, 'Uhh
... good. '
On Valentine's Day, florists tell men to 'say it with
flowers' because they know that a man finds it difficult
to say it with words. Buying a card is never a problem
for a man, it's what to write inside that stumps him.

Men often choose greetings cards
with plenty of words inside. That
way, there's less space for them to write.
Men evolved as lunch-chasers remember, not communicators. The hunt was conducted with a series of nonverbal signals and often the hunters would sit for hours
silently watching for their prey. They didn't talk or
bond. When modern men go fishing together, they can
sit for hours and say nothing. They're having a great
time enjoying each other's company, but they don't feel
the need to express it in words. Yet if women were
spending time together and not talking, it would be
indicative of a major problem. The only time men come
89

close is when the division of communication in the
tightly compartmentalised male brain is broken down by copious quantities of alcohol.

Boys and their Schooling
In the beginning, boys don't do well at school because
their verbal abilities are inferior to those of girls. As a
result, they perform poorly in languages, English and
the arts. They feel stupid in front of the more articulate
girls and become boisterous and disruptive. The idea of
starting boys at school a year later, when their language
development would be on a par with girls a year
younger, would, in that respect, seem to make a lot of
sense. It would leave boys feeling a great deal better
about themselves, and much less intimidated by the
fluency of girls the same age.
In later years, girls fall behind in physics and sciences
where spatial ability is vital. But while remedial
language classes are full of boys whose worried parents
hope and pray that their sons will eventually be able to
read, write and speak properly, no such caveat is put on
girls to brush up on their spatial reasoning. They simply
end up changing subjects.
There has been a growing trend in recent years to
separate boys and girls in certain subjects like English,
maths and sciences. Shenfield High School in Essex, for
example, allows each sex to learn in an environment
where there is no competition from the opposite sex. In
maths tests, the girls are asked questions that relate to
a garden setting, whereas the boys' tests are set in a
hardware store. This type of segregation capitalises on
the natural preferences of male and female brain-wiring
and the results are impressive. In English, the boys'
results are four times higher than the national average
90

and the girls' maths and science scores are almost
double those in other schools.
Why Women Are Great Talkers

With women, speech is a specific area located primarily
in the front left hemisphere with another, smaller
specific area in the right hemisphere. Having speech on
both sides of the brain makes women good conversationalists. They enjoy it, and do lots of it. With specific
areas to control speech, the rest of a woman's brain is
available for other tasks, enabling her to do lots of
different things at once while talking.

Location of female speech and
language. (Black areas
represent activity. ) Institute
of Psychiatry, London, 1999.

Compare the above illustration, which shows the
locations of speech and language in women, to that of
men, and you can see why women are such excellent
communicators and men are not.
Recent research has shown that a baby learns to
recognise its mother's voice while it is still in the womb,
probably from voice resonance through the mother's
body. A four-day-old baby can distinguish the speech
patterns of its native tongue from a foreign language. At
four months, babies can recognise lip movements associated with vowel sounds. Before their first birthday,
91

they are beginning to associate words with meanings; by
eighteen months, they have the beginnings of a vocabulary that, at two years old, will have expanded in the
case of girls to up to 2, 000 words. Both intellectually
and physically, this is an awesome achievement
compared to the learning abilities of an adult.
Having a specific brain zone for speech allows girls to
learn foreign languages faster and easier than boys, and
it also explains why girls are better at grammar, punctuation and spelling. In 25 years of giving seminars in
foreign countries, we have rarely been given a male
translator - they're usually women.

Subject
No. of Teachers
Spanish
2, 700
French
16, 200
German
8, 100
Drama
8, 900
Other languages 1, 300

% Women
78
75
75
67
70

% Men
22
25
25
33
30

This chart shows how women clearly dominate subjects
where strong left-brain verbal ability is required.
Women's specific speech centres give them superiority
in language ability and verbal dexterity.
These figures show that even in the most politically
correct areas - education and government - male and
female brain-orientation strongly influences a teacher's
subject choices. Equal Opportunity groups feel that
they are doing a good job because half of all teachers
are men and half are women but, as you can see,
females clearly dominate the areas involving speech.
The left brain controls the physical functions of the
right side of the body, which could be why most people
write with the right hand. This would also explain why
the handwriting of most women is much more legible
than that of men - women's specific language centres
92

are pre-wired for better use of language, both spoken
and written.
Why Women Need to Talk
Male brains are highly compartmentalised and have the
ability to separate and store information. At the end of
a day full of problems, a man's mono-tracking brain
can file them all away. The female brain does not store
information in this way - the problems just keep going
around and around in her head.

Men can mentally index their problems
and put them on hold. Women churn.
The only way a woman gets rid of her problems from
her mind is by talking about them to acknowledge
them. Therefore, when a woman talks at the end of the
day, her objective is to discharge the problems, not to
find conclusions or solutions.
The Hormonal Connection
Scientist Elizabeth Hanson of the University of Western
Ontario conducted a study on women's performance
and the hormone oestrogen. Hanson found that low
testosterone levels depressed a woman's spatial ability,
while high oestrogen enhanced her articulation and
fine-motor skills. This explains why, during the
menstrual cycle, on high oestrogen days a woman can
behave calmly and speak with near-perfect articulation.
Conversely, on high testosterone days her speech is
more erratic but her spatial ability is better - she might
93

not be so expert at humiliating a man with a wellplaced barb, but she could hit him with a frying pan
from a distance of 10 metres.

Women Love to Talk
When women sit together to watch a movie on TV, they
usually talk simultaneously about a variety of subjects,
including children, men, careers and what's happening
in their lives. When groups of men and women watch a
movie together, the men usually end up telling the
women to shut up. Men can either talk or watch the
screen - they can't do both - and they don't understand
that women can. Besides, women consider that the
point of all getting together is to have a good time and
develop relationships - not just to sit there like couch
potatoes staring at the screen.
During the ad breaks, a man often asks a woman
to explain the storyline and tell him where the relationship between the characters is going. He is unable,
unlike women, to read the subtle body language
signals that reveal how the characters are feeling emotionally. Since women originally spent their days with
the other women and children in the group, they
developed the ability to communicate successfully in
order to maintain relationships. For a woman, speech
continues to have such a clear purpose: to build relationships and make friends. For men, to talk is to relate
the facts.
Men see the telephone as a communication tool for
relaying facts and information to other people, but a
woman sees it as a means of bonding. A woman can
spend two weeks on vacation with her girlfriend and,
when she returns home, telephone the same girlfriend
and talk for another two hours.
94

There is no convincing evidence that social conditioning, the fact that girls' mothers talked to them more, is
the reason why girls talk more than boys. Psychiatrist
Dr Michael Lewis, author of Social Behaviour
and Language Acquisition, conducted experiments
that found mothers talked to, and looked at, baby
girls more often than baby boys. Scientific evidence
shows parents respond to the brain bias of their
children. Since a girl's brain is better organised to send
and receive speech, we therefore talk to them
more. Consequently, mothers who try to talk to their
sons are usually disappointed to receive only short
grunts in reply.

Men Talk Silently to Themselves
Men evolved as warriors, protectors and problem
solvers. Their brain bias and social conditioning
prevent them from showing fear or uncertainty. This is
why, when a man is asked to solve a problem, he will
often say, 'Can you leave it with me?' or 'I'll think it
over. ' And that is exactly what he does - he thinks it
over silently, with an expressionless face. Only when he
has the answer will he speak or look animated to show
he is ready to communicate the solution. Men talk
mainly inside their heads because they don't have the
verbal capability that women have to use words externally for communication. When a man is sitting staring
out of a window, a brain scan shows that he is having
a conversation with himself - inside his head. When a
woman sees a man doing this, she assumes that he's
bored or idle, and tries to talk to him or give him
something to do. A man will often become angry when
interrupted. As we know, he can't do more than one
thing at once.
95

The Downside of Silent Talk
If a man is dealing with other men, talking inside his
head is not a problem. Men can sit with each other in
a meeting for long periods of time with little speech
and no-one feels uneasy about it - it's just like fishing.
Men often enjoy a 'quiet drink' after work and that's
exactly what it is - quiet. If a man is with a woman or
a group of women, the women are likely to think he is
distant, sulky or simply doesn't want to join in. If men
want to get on better with women, then they need to
talk more.

Women Think Aloud
'My wife drives me crazy when she's got a problem or
is talking about what she intends to do that day, ' said a
man at one of our seminars. 'She talks out loud about
the options, possibilities, people involved, what she
needs to do and where she'll be going. It's so distracting, I can't concentrate on anything!'

A woman will verbalise a series of
items out loud in random order, listing
all the options and possibilities.
A woman's brain is pre-wired to use speech as a
main form of expression and this is one of her
strengths. If a man has to carry out a list of five or six
tasks, he will say, 'I've got some things to do. I'll see
you later'. A woman will verbalise all the items out
loud in random order, mentioning all options and possibilities. She will say, 'Let's see, I've got to pick up the
96

dry cleaning and get the car washed - by the way, Ray
rang and wants you to call him back - then I'll pick up
the parcel from the Post Office, I suppose I could also
... ' This is one of the reasons men accuse women of
talking too much.

The Downside of Thinking Aloud
Women perceive thinking aloud as being friendly and
sharing, but men see it differently. On a personal level,
a man thinks the woman is giving him a list of problems
that she expects him to fix, so he becomes anxious,
upset or tries to tell her what to do. In a business
meeting, men view a woman thinking aloud as being
scatterbrained, undisciplined or unintelligent. To
impress men in business, a woman needs to keep her
thoughts inside her head and only talk about conclusions. In a relationship, partners need to discuss their
different ways of working through problems. Men need
to understand that when a woman talks, she is not
expecting him to respond with solutions. Women need
to understand that when a man doesn't talk, that is not
a cue that something is wrong.

Women Talk, Men Feel Nagged
The building of relationships through talk is a priority
in the brain-wiring of women. Italian women are the
top talkers, speaking up to 6, 000-8, 000 words a day.
They use an additional 2, 000-3, 000 vocal sounds to
communicate, as well as 8, 000 -10, 000 gestures,
facial expressions, head movements and other body
signals. This gives these women a daily average of more
than 20, 000 communication 'words' to relate their
97

messages. Western women speak up to 80% of that
figure. That explains just why the British Medical
Association recently reported that women are four
times more likely to suffer with jaw problems.

'Once I didn't talk to my wife for
six months', said the comedian.
7 didn't want to interrupt'.
Contrast a woman's daily 'chatter' to that of a man. He
utters just 2, 000 - 4, 000 words and 1, 000 - 2, 000
vocal sounds, and makes a mere 2, 000 - 3, 000 body
language signals. His daily average adds up to around
7, 000 communication 'words' - just over a third the
output of most women.
This speech difference becomes apparent at the end of
the day when a man and a woman sit down together for
dinner. He's completed his 7, 000 'words' and has no
desire to communicate any more. Her state depends on
what she has been doing that day. If she's spent the day
talking with people, she may have used her quota of
'words' and also has little desire to say much more. If
she's been home with young children she will be
lucky to have used 2-3, 000 'words'. She still has up to
15, 000 to go! We're all familiar with friction at the
dinner table.
Fiona: 'Hi Darling... it's good to see you back
home. How was your day?'
Mike: 'Good. '
Fiona: 'Brian told me that you were going to
finalise that big deal with Peter Thomson
today. How did it go?'
Mike: 'Fine. '
98

Fiona: 'That's good. He can be a really tough
customer. Do you think he'll take your
advice?'
Mike: 'Yeah. '
... and so on.
Mike feels as though he's being interrogated and
becomes annoyed. He just wants 'peace and quiet'.
Attempting to avoid an argument about why he won't
talk, he asks: 'How was your day?'
And so she tells him. And tells him. Every detail of
what happened in her day.
'Well... what a day I had! I decided not to go to the
city today because my cousin's best friend works at the
bus station and he said there'd be a strike today so I
decided to walk. The weather forecaster said it would
be a sunny day so I decided to wear my blue dress - you
know the one - I bought it in America - anyway... as I
was walking I bumped into Susan and... '
She begins speaking the balance of her unspoken
words. He wonders why she won't shut up and leave
him in peace. He feels like he's been 'nagged to death'!
'All I want is a bit of peace and quiet!' is the cry of men
everywhere. He's a hunter. He's been chasing lunch all
day. He just wants to stare into the fire. The problem
comes, however, when she starts feeling ignored and
becomes resentful.

When a man is silent, it's easy for a
woman to start feeling unloved.
The point of the woman's talk is to talk. But the man
sees her continual talk about problems as a plea for
solutions. With his analytical brain, he continually
interrupts her.
99

Fiona:

'... and I slipped on the pavement and
broke the heel on my new shoes,
and then... '
Mike: (Interrupting) 'Wait a minute Fiona...
you shouldn't wear high heels to the
shopping centre! I've seen a survey on it.
It's dangerous - wear trainers - it's safer!'
He thinks, Problem solved!
She thinks, Why doesn't he keep quiet and
just listen? She continues Fiona: '... and when I got back to the car, the
back tyre was flat and so... '
Mike: (Interrupting) 'Look, what you should do
is get the tyre pressure checked when you
fill up at the garage. That way you won't
be stuck like that again!'
He thinks, That's another problem I've solved
for her.
She thinks, Why doesn't he keep quiet and listen?
He thinks, Why won't she keep quiet now and leave
me alone? Do I have to solve all her
problems for her? Why can't she get it
right the first time?
She ignores his interruptions and keeps talking.
We have surveyed thousands of women everywhere and
they all make one point clear:

When a woman is speaking her
unused words at the end of the day,
she doesn't want interruptions
with solutions to her problems.
100

This is good news for men - you're not expected to
respond, just to listen. When a woman has finished
speaking she feels relieved and happy. Plus she'll think
you're a wonderful man for listening, so you'll probably
have a good night.
Talking about day-to-day problems is how modern
women cope with stress. They see it as bonding and being
supportive. This is why most people who go to counsellors
are women, and most counsellors are women who are
trained to listen.

Why Couples Fail
Seventy-four per cent of working women and 98% of
non-working women name the biggest failing of their
husbands and boyfriends as a reluctance to talk, particularly at the end of the day. Past generations of women
never felt this problem because they always had lots of
children and other women for conversation and
support. Now mothers who stay at home are likely to
feel isolated and lonely because their female neighbours
are all likely to be at work. Working women have less
difficulty with non-talking males because they have
been speaking to others during the day. None of this is
anyone's fault. We are the first generation to have no
suitable role models for successful relationships. Our
parents never had these problems. But the good news is
that we can learn the new skills required for survival.

How Men Talk
A man's sentences are shorter than a woman's and are
more structured. They usually have a simple opening, a
clear point and a conclusion. It's easy to follow what he
101

means or wants. If you multi-track several subjects with
a man, he gets lost. It's important for a woman to
understand that if you want to be convincing or persuasive with a man, you should present only one clear
thought or idea at a time.

The first rule of talking to a man:
Keep it simple! Give him only
one thing at a time to think about.
If you are presenting an idea to a mixed group of men
and women, it's safer to use a male speaking structure
to make your points. Both sexes can follow 'man-talk'
but men have difficulty following a woman's multitracked conversations and can quickly lose interest.

Women Multi-Track
With a greater flow of information between left and
right hemispheres and specific brain locations for
speech, most women can talk about several subjects
simultaneously - sometimes in a single sentence. It's like
juggling three or four balls at the one time and most
women seem to do it effortlessly. Not only
that, but women can juggle several subjects with other
women who are all doing the same thing - and no-one
ever seems to drop a ball.
At the end of the conversation, each woman knows
something about the several subjects being discussed,
the events that took place and the meaning of each.
This multi-tracking ability is frustrating for a man as
the male brain is mono-tracked and can only handle
one subject at a time. When a group of women are
102

multi-tracking several subjects, men can become completely dazed and confused.
A woman may start talking about one subject, switch
in mid-sentence to another and then, without any
warning, revert back to the first with a little bit of
something completely different dropped in for
good measure. Men become perplexed and befuddled.
Take this family conversation from the Pease household:
Allan: 'Now, wait a minute - who said what to
whom at the office?'
Barbara: 'I wasn't talking about the office - I was
talking about my brother-in-law. '
Allan: 'Your brother-in-law? You didn't tell me
you'd changed the subject!'
Barbara: 'Well, you'll just have to pay closer
attention. Everyone else understands. '
Fiona: 'Yes - I knew what she meant. It's
(Sister) perfectly clear to me. '
Jasmine: 'So did I. Dad, you're so dumb! You
(Daughter) never follow anything!'
Allan: 'Oh, I give up with you women!'
Cameron: 'Yeah, me too, and I'm only a kid!'
(Son)

Men may be able to find their way from A
to B via a maze of back streets, but put
them in the middle of a group of women
discussing a number of topics at the same
time, and they get completely lost.
103

This kind of facility for complex multi-tracking is
common to nearly all women. Just take secretaries. For
their jobs, performing a number of different tasks at
once is an absolute necessity. It's hardly surprising then
that of the 716, 148 secretaries in the UK in 1998,
99. 1% were women - there were only 5, 913 men.
Some groups attribute this to girls being groomed for
such careers while still at school. That fails to take into
account, however, women's domination of verbal,
organisational and multi-tracking abilities. Even in
fields where hierarchies are strongly committed to
Equal Opportunity policies, such as community work,
counselling and in the welfare system, of the 144, 266
people employed to do these jobs in Britain in 1998, 43,
816 were men and 100, 450 were women. Wherever
communication skills and verbal prowess is required,
women reign supreme.

What Brain Scans Show
When a woman is speaking, brain scans show that her
front left and right brain centres controlling speech are
both operating. Her hearing functions also operate at
the same time. This powerful multi-tracking capability
allows a woman to speak and listen simultaneously and
to do both on several unrelated topics. Men are
awestruck when they first learn that women have this
ability - they just thought that women were a noisy lot.

Women can speak and listen simultaneously, while at the same time accusing
men of being able to do neither.
104

Women have been the butt of jokes from men for
thousands of years on the issue of how much they talk.
At conferences in every country we hear men say the
same things: 'Listen to those women all talking - blah,
blah, blah - no-one listening!' Chinese, German and
Norwegians say it just as much as African and Inuit
men. But the difference is, when men say it, they take it
in turns. For, as we now know, men can either speak or
listen - they can't do both at once.

Strategies for Talking with Men
Men usually only interrupt each other if they are
becoming competitive or aggressive. If you want to
communicate with a man, a simple strategy is not to
interrupt when he is speaking. This is difficult for a
woman because for her, simultaneous talk builds relationships and shows participation. She has an urge to
multi-track the conversation to impress him or make
him feel significant. When she does it, however, he
effectively becomes deaf. He will also resent what he
considers a rude interruption.

Men take turns talking, so when a man
is having his turn, let him have it.
'Stop interrupting me!' is shouted by men at women
everywhere and in every language. A man's sentences
are solution-oriented and he needs to get to the end of
the sentence, otherwise the conversation seems
pointless. He can't multi-track various points at
different times in the conversation and he views anyone
else doing it as impolite or scatterbrained. This is a
foreign concept to a woman. She multi-tracks to build
105

rapport and make him feel important. To add insult to
injury, in a typical male/female conversation, 76% of
interruptions are made by men!

Why Men Love Big Words
Having no specific brain location for speech, the hunter
needed to be able to communicate the most amount of
information with the least number of words, so his
brain developed specific areas for vocabulary, located
in the front and rear part of the left brain. In women,
vocabulary is front and back of both hemispheres and
is not a strong ability. Consequently, definition and the
meaning of words is not important to a woman because
she relies on voice intonation for meaning and body
language for emotional content.

Location of vocabulary
in the male brain

This is why the meaning of words is so important to
men and why they will use definition to gain advantage
over another man or woman. Men use language to
compete with one another and definition becomes an
important tactic in playing the game. If one man is
106

trying to make a strong or forceful point and says, for
example, '... he wasn't making his point clearly or
getting to the bottom line so that everyone could understand what he meant', another man may interrupt with,
'He didn't articulate?', to better define the point being
made and 'get one up' on the first man. Or the competitive man may use the word 'articulate' to
summarise the other person's entire sentence.

Women Use Words for Reward
A woman uses words to show participation and build
relationships and so, for her, words are a form of
reward. If she likes you, is agreeing with what you are
saying or wants to be your friend, she'll talk to you a lot.
The reverse is also true. If she wants to punish you or let
you know she's not your friend, she won't talk. Men
often call this 'the silent treatment' and the threat from
a woman of 'I'll never talk to you again!' is one to be
taken seriously.

If a woman is talking to you a lot,
she likes you. If she's not talking
to you, you're in trouble.
It takes an average man around nine minutes of silence
to realise that he's being punished. Until the nine
minutes' mark is reached, he sees her silence as a kind
of bonus - he's getting some 'peace and quiet'. Men
everywhere complain that women talk too much.
Certainly, compared to men, they talk a great deal.

107

Women Are Indirect
It started out as a nice, relaxing weekend drive through
a beautiful valley a few hours away from home. As the
road twisted and turned around the mountainside, John
switched the radio off to better concentrate on the
road. He couldn't navigate bends and listen to music at
the same time.
'John, ' said his girlfriend Allison, 'would you like a
cup of coffee?'
John smiled. 'No thanks, I'm fine, ' he replied,
thinking to himself how nice it was of her to ask. A
short time later John noticed that Allison had stopped
talking, and suspected he might have done something
wrong. 'Everything OK darling?' he enquired. 'Just
fine!' she snapped. Confused, he asked, 'So... what's
the problem?' She snorted with derision. 'You wouldn't
stop!' she said. John's analytical mind tried to
remember when she had used the word 'stop'. He was
sure she hadn't and told her so. She told him he needed
to be more sensitive. When she had asked him if he
wanted coffee, what she really meant was that she
wanted one. 'Am I supposed to be a mind reader?' he
asked sarcastically.
'Get to the point please!' is another command barked
by men to women everywhere. When a woman talks
she uses indirect speech which means that she hints at
what she wants or beats around the bush. Indirect
speech is a female speciality and serves a specific
purpose - it builds relationships and rapport with
others by avoiding aggression, confrontation or
discord. It fits perfectly into the nest-defender's overall
approach to preserving harmony.

108

Indirect talk builds rapport
among women - but it often doesn't
work with men because they
don't understand the rules.
Women's brains are process-oriented and they enjoy the
process of communicating. Men find this lack of
structure and purpose very disconcerting, and accuse
women of not knowing what they're talking about. In
business, indirect speech can be disastrous for women
as men can't follow a multi-tracked indirect conversation, and may end up turning down their proposals,
requests or bids for advancement. Indirect speech
may be excellent for building relationships but, unfortunately, that benefit may pale into insignificance if cars
or planes end up crashing when the driver or pilot is
unclear about what is being said.
Indirect speech usually includes a lot of qualifiers
such as 'kind of, 'sort of and 'a bit'. Imagine if
Winston Churchill had used indirect speech to try to
motivate the Allies against the threat from Hitler. It
wouldn't have sounded quite the same.
'We will fight them on the beaches - kind of - we will
fight them a bit in the fields - we will never, sort of,
surrender. ' They might even have ended up losing the war.
When a woman uses indirect speech with another
woman there is never a problem - women are
sensitive to picking up the real meaning. It can,
however, be disastrous using it with men. Men use
direct speech and take words literally. But with patience
and practice, men and women can learn to understand
one another.
109

Men Are Direct
Men's sentences are short, direct, solution-oriented and
to the point, drawing on a broader vocabulary and
peppered with facts. They use quantifiers such as 'none',
'never' and 'absolutely'. This kind of speech helps close
business deals quickly and efficiently, and is a means of
asserting authority over others. When men use such
direct speech in their social relationships, it often makes
them appear abrupt and rude.
Consider these statements:
Go and make an omelette for breakfast!
Make me an omelette for breakfast, will you?
Would you make me an omelette for breakfast please?
Do you think we should have an omelette for
breakfast?
Wouldn't it be great to have an omelette for breakfast?
Do you feel like an omelette for breakfast?
These requests for an omelette go from completely
direct to completely indirect. The first three statements
are most likely to be used by men, and the last three by
women. All have the same request expressed in a
different way. It is easy, sometimes, to see how an
appetite for an omelette can all end in tears, with
her saying, 'You ignorant pig! Make it yourself!' and
him saying, 'You're not capable of making a decision.
I'm going to McDonald's!'
What to Do About It

Men need to understand that indirect talk is part of a
woman's wiring and they should not get upset about it.
To build a personal relationship with a woman, a man
110

needs to listen effectively, using 'listening sounds' and
body language (we'll come to that in a moment). He
doesn't need to volunteer solutions or question her
motives. If a woman sounds like she may have a
problem, an excellent technique for a man to use is to
ask her, 'Do you want me to listen as a boy or a girl?'
If she wants him to be a girl, he just listens and encourages her. If she says she wants him to be a boy, he can
offer solutions.

To get a man to listen, give him advance
notice and provide an agenda.
In order to make the most impact on a man, tell him
what you want to talk about and when. For example:
'I'd like to talk with you about how to handle a problem
I have with my boss at work. Would after dinner at
seven o'clock be a good time for you to talk me through
it?' This appeals to the logical structure of man's brain,
makes him feel appreciated and passes on the problem!
An indirect approach would be, 'No-one appreciates
me', which creates problems because a man is likely to
think that he's being blamed and goes straight on the
defensive. Direct speech is the way men do business with
other men in Western countries but this is not the case
in the East. In Japan, for example, indirect speech is
widely used as a business language and people who use
direct language are considered childish or naive.
Foreigners who use it are seen as immature.

How to Motivate a Man to Action
Having a Masters Degree in indirect talk, a woman asks
'can' and 'could' questions: 'Can you take the rubbish
111

out?' 'Could you call me tonight?' 'Can you pick up the
kids?' A man interprets her words literally so when she
asks, 'Can you change the lightbulb?' he hears, 'Do you
have the ability to change the lightbulb?' A man interprets questions beginning with 'can' or 'could' as a
check of his ability so his logical response is Yes, he can
take rubbish out or he could change the lightbulb, but
these words carry no commitment to act. Plus, men feel
manipulated and forced into giving a 'yes' response.
To motivate a man, ask 'will' or 'would' questions to
get commitment. For example, 'Will you call me
tonight?' asks for a commitment to tonight and a man
must answer 'Yes' or 'No'. You are better off getting a
'No' answer to a 'will you' or 'would you' question and
know where you stand than get a 'Yes' to every 'can
you' or 'could you' question you ask. A man who asks
a woman to marry him says, 'Will you marry me?' He
never says, 'Could you marry me?'

Women Talk Emotively, Men are Literal
Because vocabulary is not a hotspot in a woman's
brain, she can feel that the precise definition of words
is irrelevant. She'll then take poetic licence with words,
or won't shy away from exaggeration simply for effect.
Men, however, interpret every word she says as if it is
true and respond accordingly.
In an argument a man defines a woman's words to try
to win. See if you recognise this exchange:
Robyn: 'You never agree with anything I say. '
John: 'What do you mean never? I agreed with
your last two points didn't I?'
Robyn: 'You always disagree with me and you
always want to be right!'
112

John: 'Not true! I don't always disagree with you!
I agreed with you this morning, I agreed with
you last night and I agreed with you last
Saturday so you can't say I always disagree!'
Robyn: 'You say this every time I bring it up!'
John: 'That's a lie! I don't say it every time!'
Robyn: 'And you only ever touch me when you
want sex!'
John: 'Stop exaggerating! I don't only ever... '
She continues arguing, using emotions to fight him; he
keeps defining her words. The argument escalates to the
point where she refuses to talk or he stomps off to be
on his own. But to argue successfully, a man needs to
understand that a woman will use words that she
doesn't really mean, so he shouldn't take them literally
or define them. Take, for example, when a woman says,
'If I sat next to a woman who was wearing the identical
dress, I'd just die! There's nothing worse!' She doesn't
really mean that there is nothing worse or that she
really expects to die, but a man's literal mind may
respond with, 'No, you won't die, there are worse
things than that!' which sounds sarcastic to a woman.
By the same token, however, a woman needs to learn
that she'll have to argue logically with a man if she
wants to win and only give him one thought at a time.
And women should never multi-track in an argument their barbs have no chance of hitting home.
How Women Listen
Typically, a woman can use an average of six listening
expressions in a ten-second period to reflect, and then
feed back the speaker's emotions. Her face will mirror
113

the emotions being expressed by the speaker. To
someone watching, it can almost look as if the events
being discussed are happening to both women.
Here is a typical ten-second sequence of a woman
showing she is listening:

A woman reads the meaning of what is being said
through voice intonation and the speaker's body
language. This is exactly what a man needs to do to
capture a woman's attention and keep her listening.
Most men are daunted by the prospect of using facial
feedback while listening, but it pays big dividends for
the man who becomes adept at the art.

Men Listen Like Statues
The biological objective of our male warrior when
listening was to remain impassive, so as not to betray
his emotions.
Here is the same range of facial expressions used by a
man in a ten-second listening period:

114

This is a light-hearted look at male listening technique,
but recognising the truth in the humour gives it edge.
This emotionless mask that men use while listening
allows them to feel in control of the situation, but does
not mean a man does not experience emotions. Brain
scans reveal that men feel emotion as strongly as
women, but avoid showing it.

How to Use the Grunt
Women use a range of high and low-pitched listening
sounds (five tones) including 'oohs' and 'aahs',
repeating a speakers' words or context, and multitracking the conversation. Men have a more restricted
pitch range (three tones) and have difficulty decoding
the meanings behind pitch changes, so speak in a more
monotone voice.
To show that they are listening, men use what is
called The Grunt - a series of short 'hmmps' with an
occasional little nod of the head. Women criticise men
for this form of listening, which partly explains why
women accuse men of not listening. Often he is
listening, he just doesn't look like he is. For businesswomen, there is money in The Grunt. If you're a
woman explaining an idea or proposition to a man
or men, it is vital that when a man is speaking, having
his turn, you do not feed back his emotions, as you
would with a woman. Just sit there expressionless, nod,
grunt and don't interrupt. We have found that women
who use this technique score big points on the credibility
scale from men. Women who feed back men's
emotions (or what they think the men's emotions might
be) are heavily marked down on credibility and
authority, and are sometimes described by men as
'dizzy' or 'too emotional'!
115

How to Get a Man to Listen
Make a time, give him an agenda, announce a time
limit and tell him you don't want solutions or plans of
action. Say, 'I'd like to talk with you about my day,
Allan. Would after dinner be OK? I don't need any
solutions to problems - I'd just like you to listen. ' Most
men will agree to a request like this because it has a
time, a place and an objective - all the things that
appeal to the male brain. And he is not expected to do
any work.

The Schoolgirl Voice
Most women don't need a degree in evolutionary
biology to know the power of talking in a high-pitched,
almost singing voice. High voices are related to high
oestrogen levels and their child-like quality appeals to
most men's inbuilt urge to protect. Women prefer a
deeper bass voice in a man as it is a powerful indicator
of high testosterone levels, meaning greater virility. This
drop to bass levels occurs in boys when they reach
puberty as testosterone surges through their bodies and
their voices 'break'. When a woman increases her
speaking pitch and a man decreases his, it is a powerful
signal that they are making a play for one another. We
are not, in any way, implying that this is the way men
and women should act around each other, but merely
explaining what actually happens.

Think someone's giving you
the come on? Listen to the
pitch of his or her voice.
116

It is important to know that studies constantly show
that, in business, a woman with a deeper voice is considered more intelligent, authoritative and credible. It is
possible to practise a deeper voice by lowering the chin
and speaking in a slower, more monotone way. In
attempting to gain authority many women mistakenly
raise their voice, which gives the impression that they
are aggressive. Two interesting observations are that
some overweight women use the 'girlie' voice to counteract the power of the large body size and others use it
to encourage protective behaviour in men they like.

117

CHAPTER 5

SPATIAL ABILITY:
MAPS, TARGETS AND
PARALLEL PARKING

'Oh no! I can't believe this, girls... Look at this map!... I think
we were supposed to turn right at that big green mountain... '

118

How a Map Almost Led to Divorce
were on their way to see a show in the
Raycity.andRayRuth
always drove. They never discussed why he
always drove, he just did. And, like most men, he
became a different person behind the wheel.
Ray asked Ruth to look up the address in the street
directory. She opened it at the appropriate page and then
turned the directory upside-down. She rotated it to the
right way up and then turned it upside-down again. Then
she sat silently and stared at it. She understood what a map
meant but, when it came to applying it to where they were
going, it seemed strangely irrelevant. It was like studying
geography in school. All those pink and green shapes bore
little resemblance to the real world in which she lived.
Sometimes she coped with the map when they were
heading North, but South was a disaster - and they were
heading South. She rotated the map one more time. After
several more seconds of silence, Ray spoke.
'Stop turning the map upside-down!' he snapped.
'But I need to face it in the direction we're going, '
Ruth explained, meekly.
'Yeah, but you can't read it upside-down!' Ray
barked.
'Look Ray, it makes logical sense to face the map in
the direction we need to go. That way I can match
the street signs with the directory!' she said, raising her
voice indignantly.
'Yeah, but if the map was supposed to be read upsidedown, they'd print the writing upside-down, right?
Stop fooling around and tell me where to go!'

119

'I'll tell you where to go all right!' responded Ruth,
furiously. She threw the street directory at him and
shouted, 'Read it yourself!'
Does this argument sound familiar? It's one of the
most common between men and women of all races,
stretching back thousands of years. In the llth
Century, Lady Godiva rode her horse naked down the
wrong Coventry street, Juliet got lost trying to get back
home after a love tryst with Romeo, Cleopatra threatened Marc Antony with castration for trying to force
her to understand his battle maps and the Wicked
Witch of the West often headed South, North or East.

Sexist Thinking
Reading maps and understanding where you are relies on
spatial ability. Brain scans show that spatial ability is
located mostly in the right brain for men and boys, and is
one of a male's strongest abilities. It developed from
ancient times to allow men, the hunters, to calculate the
speed, movement and distance of prey, work out how
fast they had to run to catch their targets, and know how
much force they needed to kill their lunch with a rock or a
spear. Spatial ability is located in both brain hemispheres
for women but does not have a specific measurable
location as it does in males. Only about 10% of women
have spatial abilities that are as dynamic as those of the best
men.

The majority of women
have limited spatial ability.
To some people, this research may appear sexist because
we will be discussing the kind of strengths and abilities
120

at which males excel, and the pursuits and occupations
in which biology has given them the clear advantage.
Later, however, we will look at areas where women have
the upper hand.

The Lunch-Chaser in Action
Spatial ability means being able to picture in the mind the
shape of things, their dimensions, co-ordinates, proportions, movement and geography. It also involves being
able to imagine an object being rotated in space, navigating around an obstacle course and seeing things from a
three-dimensional perspective. Its purpose is to work out
the movement of a target and know how to hit it.
Iowa State University professor of psychology Dr
Camilla Benbow scanned the brains of more than a
million boys and girls to study their spatial ability and
reported that differences between the sexes were
already striking by the age of four. She found that while
girls were excellent at seeing two dimensions in the
brain, boys had the ability to see a third dimension,

Location of spatial ability in the brain. (Black areas
represent activity. ) Institute of Psychiatry, London, 1999.
121

giving depth. On three-dimensional video tests, boys
outstripped girls in spatial ability by a ratio of 4: 1 and
the best girls were often outclassed by the lowest
scoring boys. With males, this is a specific brain
function located in at least four sites in the right front
hemisphere and several smaller areas in the left. Not
having a specific location for spatial ability means that
most women generally score on the low side with
spatial tasks. Most women don't enjoy spatial activities
and don't pursue careers or pastimes that require them.
Having a specific area for spatial ability, most men and
boys are good at any activities that use those skills and
often pursue related careers and sports. For males, it's
also the area of the brain that allows them to solve
problems. Spatial ability is not strong in women and
girls because being able to chase animals and find the
way home was never part of woman's job description.
This is why many women have trouble reading a map
or street directory.

Women don't have good
spatial skills because they evolved
chasing little else besides men.
There are thousands of documented scientific studies
that confirm male superiority in spatial skills. This is
not surprising considering his evolution as a hunter. But
modern man no longer has to catch lunch. Today, he
uses his spatial ability in other areas such as golf,
computer games, football, hunting and any sport or
activity involving chasing something or aiming at a
target. Most women think hunting is boring. But if they
had a specific right brain area for aiming at a target
they would not only enjoy it, they would succeed.
122

Men are so obsessed with watching another man hit a
ball at a target that some of the highest-paid people in
the world now include golfers, footballers, basketballers
and tennis players. You don't need a college degree to be
respected any more; you simply need to be good at estimating speed, distance, angles and directions.
Why Men Know Where to Go
Spatial ability allows a man to rotate a map in his mind
and know in which direction to go. If he has to return to
the same location at a later time, he doesn't need the map,
as his spatial area can store the information. Most males
can read a map while facing North and know that they
need to go South. Similarly, most males can read a map
and then successfully navigate by memory. Studies show
that a man's brain measures speed and distance to know
when to change direction. Most men, if put in an unfamiliar room with no windows, can point North. As a
lunch-chaser, he needed to find his way back home or
there would be little chance of survival.

Most men can always point north, even if
they have no idea where they are.
Sit in any sports stadium and you can witness
how men leave their seats to buy a drink and
successfully navigate their way back to that seat some
time later. Go to any city in the world and watch
female tourists standing at junctions furiously turning
their maps around and looking lost. Visit a multistorey car park at any shopping mall and watch
female shoppers wandering gloomily around trying to
find their cars.
123

Why Boys Hang Out in Video Arcades
Visit any video or pinball arcade in the world and you'll
see that it's full of teenage boys using their spatial skills.
Let's look at some of the scientific studies highlighting
spatial ability. Most of them involved the assembly of
three-dimensional mechanical apparatus.
A study at Yale University found that only 22% of
females could perform such tasks as well as males. It also
discovered that while 68% of males could programme a
VCR or similar equipment from a set of written instructions on the first attempt, only 16% of females could do
it. Boys excelled when their right eye was covered so that
only the left eye could receive information which was fed
to the right brain where most spatial skills are located. It
made no difference to girls which eye they used, because
their brain tried to solve the problems using both sides.
This is why women rarely choose to be motor mechanics,
engineers or airline pilots.
Dr Camilla Benbow and colleague Dr Julian Stanley
tested a group of gifted children and found that boys
good at maths outnumbered girls by 13 to 1. Boys can
construct a block building from two-dimensional plans
easier and quicker than girls, they can estimate angles
accurately and can see whether a flat surface is level.
These ancient hunting skills are the reason men
dominate areas like architecture, chemistry, building,
and statistics. Boys test better in hand-eye co-ordination, making them more proficient at ball sports. This
accounts for the male obsession with cricket, golf,
football, basketball or any game that involves estimating co-ordinates and throwing, chasing or shooting at a
target. It also explains why video and pinball arcades
and skateboard rinks around the world are full of boys
but there are few girls. Most of the girls are there to
impress the boys but, as most teenage girls quickly learn,
124

the boys are more obsessed with the games than they are
in noticing them.
In 1999 Dr Sandra Witelson led a team of scientists at
McMaster University in Ontario, Canada, which
analysed the anatomy of Albert Einstein's brain and
compared it to the preserved brains of 35 men and 56
women known to have normal intelligence when they
died. They also compared his brain to those of eight
other men who were of similar age to Einstein when
they died. They found that the spatial area of his brain,
related to his mathematical reasoning, was 15 percent
wider on both sides than in normal men and women.

Boys' Brains Develop Differently
Parents who have both sons and daughters quickly
come to realise that boys are very different to girls in
their speed of development. The right brain in boys
develops and grows at a faster rate than the left brain.
It develops more connections within itself and also has
fewer connections with the left brain. In girls, both
sides grow at a more balanced speed giving girls a
better range of abilities. Since they also have more connections between left and right through a thicker
corpus callosum, there tends to be more ambidextrous
girls than boys, and many more women who have difficulty in knowing their left hand from their right.
Testosterone hormones inhibit the left brain growth in
boys as a trade-off for greater right side development,
giving them a better spatial ability for hunting. Studies
of children between the ages of five and eighteen show
that boys outstrip girls in their ability to move a beam
of light to hit a target, reproduce a pattern by walking it
out on the floor, assemble a range of three-dimensional
objects and solve problems requiring mathematical
125

reasoning. All of these skills are located mainly in the
right brain of at least 80% of men and boys.

Diana and her Furniture
When the removal van was unloading the furniture to
go into Diana's new home, she was busily running her
tape measure over every piece to see if it would fit into
certain places. As she measured the dining room
dresser, her 14-year-old son Cliff said, 'Forget it mum that won't fit where you want it to go. It's too big. '
Diana then measured the space and Cliff was right. She
could not comprehend how he could look at a piece of
furniture and imagine whether or not it would fit into
a space in the house. And how did he do it? He used his
spatial ability.

Testing Spatial Ability
American scientist Dr D. Wechsler created a series of IQ
Tests that eliminated sexual bias against men or women
during spatial tests. By testing members of cultures
from primitive races to sophisticated city dwellers all
over the world, he, like other researchers elsewhere,
came to the conclusion that women had superiority
over men in general intelligence, being around three per
cent more intelligent than men, despite having slightly
smaller brains. When it came to solving maze puzzles,
however, men were overwhelmingly superior to
women, scoring 92% of the top honours against
women's eight per cent, regardless of culture. Critics
might say this proves women are too intelligent to play
silly maze puzzles, but it does graphically demonstrate
male spatial ability.
126

The following spatial test was developed at the
University of Plymouth and is the type used as an occupational test in the selection of pilots, navigators and
air traffic controllers. It measures your ability to take
two-dimensional information and construct, in your
mind, a three-dimensional object.
Imagine that the puzzle in Test 1 is an opened-up
cube. Assuming that the face with the cross x is on the
right and the circle is on the left, which of your options
A, B, C or D is the correct one? Do the test now.

This test requires your brain to imagine the image in
three dimensions and then rotate it to get the correct
angle. These are the same skills required to read a map
or street directory, land a plane or chase a buffalo. (The
correct answer is A. )
Now here's a more complex version of the test that
requires your brain to make even more spatial rotations.

127

Tests by zoologists show that male mammals are
superior to female mammals in spatial abilities - male
rats are far better at finding their way out of mazes than
female rats, and male elephants are better than females
at relocating a waterhole. (By the way, the correct
answer for Test 2 is C. )

How Women Can Navigate
'If men didn't design maps that way, we wouldn't have
to turn them upside down, ' many women complain.
The British Cartography Society, however, reports that
50% of its members are female and that 50% of those
who design and edit maps are also women. 'Map design
is a two-dimensional task in which women are equally
as capable as men, ' said leading British cartographer
Alan Collinson. 'The difficulty that most women have
is reading and navigating with the map because they
need a three-dimensional perspective to navigate a
route. I design tourist maps that have a three-dimensional perspective - they show trees, mountains and
other landmarks. Women have much greater success
with this type of map. Our tests show that men have the
ability to turn a two-dimensional map into a threedimensional view in their mind, but most women don't
seem to be able to do this. '

Women dramatically improve their navigational skills using perspective maps.
Another interesting finding has been that men score
highly when navigating with a group leader who
verbally tells them new directions at each point on a
given route. Women, by contrast, perform abysmally
128

when given verbal instructions. This shows how men
can convert sound signals into three-dimensional mind
maps to visualise the correct direction and route to
take, whereas women perform better with a threedimensional perspective map.

What if You Can't Find North?
Australian sailor Kay Cottee was the first woman to
single-handedly circumnavigate the world non-stop.
This is clearly a woman who knew where she was
going, right?
At a recent conference she told us that she had difficulty reading a street directory. Stunned, we asked, 'So
how did you go around the world?' 'That's navigation, '
Kay replied. 'You programme the computer and it takes
you in the right direction. I don't go out to sea and say,
'Gee I think I should turn left... 'A street directory is an
intuitive thing. You need to 'feel' which way to go.
When I go to a strange city I always catch taxis to get
around. I tried rental cars but I always ended up going
the wrong way. '
People find it hard to believe that Kay Cottee could
get lost trying to find her boat to circumnavigate the
world but she clearly shows how, with determination,
planning and courage, you can navigate your way
around the world - even if you can't read a street
directory - by organising the right people and
equipment needed to achieve the task.
The Flying Map

We (the authors) travel the world for nine months of
the year giving seminars, and spend much of our time
129

in hire cars. Allan normally drives as his spatial skills
are better than Barbara's which leaves her to navigate.
Barbara has almost no navigational ability so she
and Allan have argued and fought their way around the
world for years - from city to city, country to country.
Allan has had street directories and maps thrown at
him in practically every language by Barbara, and
on several occasions she has fled from him and
his maps, catching buses or trains and shouting, 'Read
it yourself!'

Barbara has no sense of direction, but
Allan can never find socks in bis drawer.
Fortunately, their research into spatial ability alerted
them to the problems that arise when one partner has
little spatial ability and the other does not understand
this. Today, Allan reads the map before driving and
Barbara talks and points out interesting features of the
landscape that Allan normally misses. They are still
happily married and flying maps no longer pose a
hazard to passing motorists.

The Upside-Down Map
In England in 1998, John and Ashley Sims created a
two-way map that has a standard map view when travelling North and a second, upside-down view, with
South at the top of the page, for travelling South. In a
British national newspaper's weekend magazine they
offered a free map to the first 100 people who wrote in.
They received requests from more than 15, 000 women
- and a handful of men. They told us that men saw no
point in an Upside-Down Map or thought it was a joke.
130

Women, however, are impressed because it replaces the
need for spatial rotation.
BMW motor cars were the first to install Global
Positioning System (GPS) visual navigational equipment
in their vehicles which allows the image to be turned
upside down to match the direction the car is travelling.
Predictably, it has proved a huge hit with women.

A Final Test
Try this test developed by human resource and research
company Saville and Holdsworth (UK) Ltd which is
given to candidates to test their spatial reasoning for
jobs such as air traffic controllers. If you can't do it in
under three minutes, you're out. This is even harder
than the first two and, if you're male, should increase
the temperature of your right hemisphere.
In this test, you are given a pattern which, if cut out,
could be folded to make a three-dimensional box. You
must decide which, if any, of the four boxes in each set
could be made by folding the pattern, and show this by
circling the appropriate one. If you think that none of
the boxes could be made from the pattern, do not circle
any box.
Most people who successfully complete this test in
under three minutes are men, particularly those with
three-dimensional jobs like architects and mathematicians. Now you know why 94% of air traffic controllers are men. Most women think these type of tests
are a waste of time, although we found one woman
who completed it successfully in nine seconds. Her
occupation? She's an actuary.
131

How to Avoid an Argument
Men love to drive fast around winding roads because
their spatial skills come into play - gear ratios, clutch
and brake combinations, relative speed to corners, angles
and distances. And they do it with the radio turned off.
The modern male driver sits behind the wheel, hands his
wife a map and asks her to navigate. With limited spatial
ability she becomes silent and starts turning the
132

map around and feels incompetent. Then she tries to
identify something on the horizon that resembles
something on the map. Most men don't understand that
if you don't have specific areas in the brain for mental
map rotation, you'll rotate it in your hands. It makes
perfect sense to a woman to face a map in the direction
she is travelling. For a man to avoid arguments, he
should avoid asking a woman to read a map.

To have a happy life: Never insist that a
woman read a map or street directory.
Having spatial ability on both sides of the brain interferes with a female's speech function, so if you give a
woman a street directory, she'll stop talking before she
turns it around. Give it to a man and he'll continue
talking - but he'll also turn the radio off because he
can't operate his hearing functions at the same time as
his map-reading skills. That's why when a phone rings
in his home he demands that everyone keeps quiet
while he answers it.
Women work out mathematical problems mainly in
the left side of the brain which not only makes them
slower at calculus but explains why so many women
and girls perform mathematical functions aloud. Men
everywhere shout, 'Would you mind calculating in your
head please! I can't concentrate!' as they try to read
their newspapers.
How to Argue While Driving

A husband who teaches his wife to drive is heading for the
divorce courts. Men all around the world give the same
instructions to women: 'Turn left - slow down! 133

change gears - watch out for those pedestrians - concentrate - stop crying!' For a man, driving is a test of his
spatial ability relative to the environment. For a woman,
the purpose of driving is to get safely from point A to
point B. A man's best strategy as a passenger is to close
his eyes, turn up the radio and stop commentating
because, overall, women are safer drivers than men.
She'll get him there - it may just take a little longer,
that's all. But at least he can relax and arrive alive.
A woman will criticise a man's driving because his
spatial ability allows him to make decisions and judgements that look dangerous to her. Provided he doesn't
have a poor driving record, she also needs to relax and
not criticise, and just let him do the driving. When the
first drop of rain hits the windscreen, a woman immediately turns on the wipers, something men can never
understand. A man's brain waits until the exact amount
of raindrops are on the screen relative to the speed of
the wipers and he turns the wipers on when the precise
amount of time has passed. In other words, he uses
spatial ability.

How to Sell to a Woman
Never give a woman directions like, 'Head North' or
'Go West for five kilometres' as this requires compass
skills. Instead, give directions involving landmarks such
as, 'Drive past McDonald's and head for the building
with the National Bank sign on top. ' This allows a
woman to pick up these landmarks with her peripheral
vision. Builders and architects everywhere lose millions
in business deals by presenting two-dimensional plans
and blueprints to female decision-makers. A man's
brain can convert the plan to three dimensions to see
how the building would look completed, but to a
134

woman it's just a page of irrelevant lines. A threedimensional model or computer image will sell houses
to women. With this information, a woman need never
again feel like an idiot when looking at a map. Give it
to a man, it's his job.
It's much more relaxing for a man to navigate and
drive while a woman talks about the interesting landmarks and sights along the way. As you know, a man has
inferior verbal skills compared to a woman, so his navigational skills seem like a fair trade-off. It means that he
can find his way to the address of his new girlfriend, even
if he won't know what to say when he gets there.

The Pain of Reverse Parallel Parking
If you were asked to look at cars that had been reverse
parked in a street, could you tell which cars had been
parked by men and which by women? Research commissioned by an English defensive driving school
showed that men in the UK averaged 82% accuracy in
reverse parking someone else's car close to the kerb and
71% could successfully park their vehicle on the first
attempt. Women scored only 22% accuracy, while a
mere 23% could do it successfully on the first attempt.
A similar study in Singapore gave men an accuracy
score of 66%, with 68% doing it first time. For women,
the accuracy result was 19%, and only 12% did it the
first time. The bottom line: if the driver is a
Singaporean woman, get out of the way! The best
parkers are German men with 88% doing it successfully
on the first attempt. Parking tests at driving schools
show that women generally do better at reverse parking
than men during driver training, but statistics show
women perform worse in real life situations. This is
because women are better than men at learning a task
135

and successfully repeating it, provided the environment
and conditions under which they do it don't change. In
traffic, however, every situation presents a new set of
data to be assessed and men's spatial ability is better
suited to handle this task.
Most women would prefer to park the car in a larger
space somewhere else and walk back to their destination rather than reverse park into a tight spot.

If women ran local councils, reverse and
parallel parking would be banned!
In recent times many regional towns and cities have
introduced 45-degree rear-to-kerb reverse parking
because it has been shown to be safer by allowing the
driver to drive forward when they depart.
Unfortunately, this has not helped most women's
concerns about reverse parking as it still requires
spatial abilities to estimate angles and distances. We
surveyed 20 local councils who implemented this type
of reverse parking and discovered that there were practically no women involved in the decision. It was
almost always men. If a council was made up completely of women, reverse and parallel parking would
no longer be allowed! They would arrange for drivethrough style parking that eliminates the need for
reversing or estimating angles and distances. This
would take up a greater amount of space, but there
would be fewer accidents.
Women Are Safer Drivers

A study of the insurance records of 2. 3 million UK
drivers in the year 2000 revealed that 25. 5% of women
136

drivers had made a claim in the last 4 years compared
to 18. 6% of men. It also showed that 9% of women
drivers do not have a no-claim bonus - indicating that
they had an accident in the past 12 months - compared
to 6. 5% of men. It would be easy to conclude that
women are worse drivers than men are but closer
examination shows a different story. Women are more
cautious drivers, they will take an extra couple of
seconds before moving off on a roundabout or wait
when there is nothing to wait for. This caution can lead
to more accidents because other drivers become frustrated at what seems like indecision. Women have more
accidents but their insurance payouts are lower because
it involved more bumps and scrapes. Most high payout
claims and total write-offs involve male drivers with
too much testosterone on the pedal. Women make more
claims but men are more dangerous drivers. The study
also found that divorced women are more likely to have
smashes than married women.

How Women Were Misled
So where does all this spatial evidence leave women?
Many well-intentioned groups were convinced that once
they were freed from the supposed chains of male
oppression and prejudice, they would quickly climb to
the top levels of most male-dominated professions and
pastimes. But, as you are about to see, men continue to
hold a virtual monopoly in those professions and
pursuits that require spatial ability. Millions of women
have ignored their natural inclinations towards careers
and pursuits in which they could naturally excel with
their particular brain-oriented skills.

137

Spatial Ability in Education
As we've seen, our biology directs us to occupations
and pastimes that are compatible with the wiring of our
brain. Let's analyse one area where equal opportunity is
a high priority - teaching. We interviewed education
officials in Australia, New Zealand and Britain who all
emphasised that they try to keep the split of
male/female teachers at 50/50 to give equal opportunity
to the sexes. In Britain in 1999, 48% of teachers were
male and 52% female. The feminised brain is better
suited to teaching than the male brain because its
communication and human interaction abilities are
more highly developed. Let's look at what subject preferences are selected by teachers of each sex.

Subject
No. of Teachers % Men % Women
Biology
5, 100
49
51
Business studies
6, 400
50
50
History
13, 800
54
46
Geography
14, 200
56
44
Social studies
11, 000
52
48
Music
5, 600
51
49
Careers education
1, 900
47
53
Personal and
Social education
74, 200
47
53
General studies
7, 900
53
47
Classics
510
47
53
Physical education
20, 100
58
42
Religious education 13, 400
56
44
Art
9, 400
44
56
There are two lessons to be learnt from this table.
Firstly, the subjects taught are those that don't require
a high degree of left or right brain dominance to be able
to teach them. A high degree of spatial ability is not
138

required and neither is great left brain verbal capability.
You can see that the percentages are spread fairly evenly
between male and female teachers.

Subject
No. of Teachers % Men % Women
Physics
4, 400
82
18
Info Technology
10, 700
69
31
Sciences
28, 900
65
35
Chemistry
4, 600
62
38
Subjects requiring spatial ability

The above table shows clearly that where the ability to
think spatially is a necessity, men dominate.

Spatial Skill Occupations
Following is a list of occupations where high spatial
ability is critical to job performance and in which
someone's life can be lost if it's absent. You don't need
to be a rocket scientist to understand the significance of
this chart and its relationship to male right-brain
hunting skills.
Those determined to cling on to the belief that
natural abilities count for nought still claim that male
oppression, men's 'boys only' attitudes and traditionally
male-biased unions have prevented women from
achieving equality in these professions. The Royal
Institute of British Architects, however, reports that
50% of students enrolling in architecture courses are
women, but that they only account for nine per cent of
all practising architects. Obviously, some of the women
who did not become architects chose parenthood, but
what happened to the rest? In accountancy, 17% of
British accountants are women yet 38% of all those
who started the course were women.
139

'Why aren't there more female airline pilots?' we
asked the airlines. 'They don't take the course, ' was the
answer. 'Women aren't interested in flying planes. '
Most airline officials were vague about, or unaware of,
the significance of spatial ability in flying and many
were nervous about making any comment on gender
differences despite the glaringly obvious fact that 98%
of all cockpit crews are male. One thing is clear here:
women are not in most of these professions because
they don't enrol in the courses. Their brain bias is not
suited to these areas so they are not interested in
learning to do the job.

Occupation
Flight engineer
Engineer
Racing driver
Nuclear engineer
Pilot
Air traffic controller
Dragcar/bike racer
Architect
Flight deck officer
Actuary
Billiard player
Accountant

% Men
100. 0%
100. 0%
99. 8%
98. 3%
99. 2%
94. 0%
93. 6%
91. 0%
90. 5%
90. 0%
87. 0%
83. 0%

Billiards and Nuclear Science
In the course of our research, we spoke with a number
of professional snooker and billiards players. 'The
women who play professional billiards think and act
like men, ' said one former world champion. 'They talk
like us and dress like us too - suits and bow-ties. ' The
female players, however, believed that if they practised
140

as much as the men, they'd be just as capable. Many
felt that men's attitudes towards them was a significant factor in holding them back. 'But what about
spatial ability?' we asked. 'Measuring the relative
speed and angles of the balls, the distances to the
pocket and final placement of the white ball?' 'Never
heard of it,' was the answer. Again, men's attitudes
were held responsible for the overall lack of female
champions and participants.
'We offer equal opportunity to both sexes,' the
Institute of Nuclear Engineers told us, 'but we hire
based on capability, not equality.' And 98.3% of
nuclear engineers are males. Interestingly, the
Institute's research found that female engineers are
more capable with letters of the alphabet than men,
and that men are better with numbers. This makes
sense - letters are linked to people, relationships and
verbal abilities but numbers relate to the spatial relationship between things.
Look at history and you will see that practically no
women have excelled in areas where spatial ability
and mathematical reasoning are required, such as
chess, composing and rocket science. Some may claim
that sexist male tyranny has kept women out of these
pursuits, but look around and you'll see that in our
world of equal opportunity, the women who eclipse
men in spatially related pursuits are rare. The main
reason is that their brains tell them they're more interested in defending their nests rather than attacking
someone else's.
Women excel in the creative areas such as performing
arts, teaching, human resources and literature, all
fields where abstract reasoning is not paramount.
While men play chess, women dance and decorate.
141

The Computer Industry
Computer science is built largely on mathematics,
which relies on spatial ability and, as a result, it's a male
domain. Some computer science areas, however, such as
programming or user-interface design, require more
understanding of human psychology than mathematics
and these are the areas which have the highest numbers
of women.
Results of a survey in US Business Women In
Computing magazine show a steady decline in the
number of women entering the information technology
workplace between 1995 and 2000, and cites the
reason as a lack of interest from women in taking these
courses. The study also found that women are twice as
likely as men to use computers in the workplace. While
84% of women saw the computer simply as a means to
an end or as a tool to provide creative freedom, only
33% of men shared this view. The survey showed that
67% of men saw the technology or playing with the
programmes and accessories as more important in
computing, in common with just 16% of women.

Maths and Accounting
The males who enter spatially-related occupations and
professions usually remain and dominate. Most maths
teachers are still males even though, in this subject area,
the gender gap is closing. In the year 2000, 58% of
maths teachers in the United Kingdom were men.
So how do we explain the increasing percentage of
women teaching this subject? The likely explanation is
that women are more suited to teaching, interaction
and organising groups, and are more committed to
learning the basics than men. Because they are teaching
142

the same material over and over again, they can do an
excellent job with teaching most subjects, including
maths. This would also explain why in the field of
accountancy there is a general increase in the number of
female accountants. Accounting has become a
customer-friendly sales role for which women's brains
are better suited, with the accounting function
becoming secondary. In large accounting firms everywhere it is now common to see a female accountant
wooing and winning the clients and the mathematical
accounting work delegated to the junior males in the
back room. When the requirement for the job is pure
spatial ability and mathematical reasoning, however,
men still dominate. This is why 91% of actuaries and
99% of all engineers are male.

All Things Being Equal ...
In Australia, just five percent of the engineering
workforce is female yet, on average, they earn 14% more
than their male counterparts. This indicates that where
equal spatial ability exists, women can perform at a
higher level than men. In professional motor-racing there
have been almost no female champions since the
invention of the motor car but in drag-racing, around
10% of the participants and winners are women. Why?
Drag-racing does not require the spatial skills to deal with
speeds, angles, corners, overtaking and complicated gear
ratios. Drag-racers drive in a straight line and the winner
is the person who has the fastest reaction time to the
green light - an advantage that women have over men.

Where equal spatial ability exists, women
can perform at a higher level than men.
143

Although most female drag-racers we tested on the
Brain-Wiring Test showed overall higher male brain
orientation than non-racing women, they still spoke of
the benefits in drag-racing as relationship-orientated.
'The guys are really great to work with,' they said.
'Everyone pitches in.' And, 'We're all good friends.' The
male drivers saw the benefits as winning trophies,
having wonderful car specifications and bragging about
accidents they had survived.

Boys and their Toys
Boys love their toys. This is why 99% of all patents are
registered by men. Girls love to play with toys too but
usually lose interest by age 12 as they begin to grow
into young women. Men never lose their obsession for
impractical, spatially-related toys - they just spend a lot
more on them. They love miniature pocket TVs, mobile
phones shaped like cars, computer and video games,
digital cameras, complicated gadgets, lights that go off
or on by voice command and anything that has an
engine. If it beeps, blinks and needs at least six D-cell
batteries, most men want one.

How Women Feel
Any discussion on gender differences such as those in
this book brings howls of protest from feminists and
politically correct activists, who see it as undermining
many of their arguments for a fair go in life. But while
the prejudices of society may reinforce and exacerbate
stereotypical behaviour in males and females, and fundamental inequities, the stereotypes are not the cause of
the behaviour. Our basic biology and how our brains
144

are organised are the culprits. Many women feel that
they are failures or that women in general have failed
by not conquering male-dominated areas. That's simply
not true. Women haven't failed; they've merely not been
particularly well-equipped to enter areas that suit male
brains much more.

Women haven't failed - they've
only failed to be like men.
The idea that women have not succeeded in society is
only valid when based on the assumption that success
by male standards is, or should be, the benchmark for
everyone's success. But who says being a chief executive
controlling a corporation, flying a jumbo jet or programming a space shuttle's computer is the ultimate
measure of fulfilment? Men do. It's their standard of
excellence, not everyone's.

Can You Improve Your Spatial Skill?
In a word, yes. There are several alternatives. You can
wait for the natural process of evolution to take place
and constantly practise your spatial activities until your
brain develops sufficient connections. Be prepared for
the long haul with this one, though. Biologists estimate
that it could take thousands of years.
A course of testosterone hormones will also improve
spatial ability, but this is not a satisfactory option as the
downside includes increased aggression level, baldness
and a beard, which might not suit most women.
It is now clear that practice and repetition help permanently to create more brain connections for a given
task. Rats raised in cages full of toys have more brain
145

mass than rats with no toys. Humans who retire to do
nothing lose their brain mass, whereas those who keep
active mental interests maintain mass and even increase
it. Learning and practising how maps work can greatly
increase your practical ability to use them, just as daily
practice on the piano makes for more competent
playing. Unless the player has the kind of brain
circuitry that facilitates intuitive playing, however, lots
of regular practice is required to maintain a reasonable
level. Unless the piano player or map reader keeps that
up, their skill level will diminish more quickly and take
longer to recover than a person whose brain is wired to
handle the task.

A bald head and a beard might
be too high a price to pay for
women to improve their spatial skills.
You can successfully teach a dog to walk on its hind
legs, and if it repeats this behaviour regularly, its
offspring are also likely to do it too. But it's not a dog's
natural position and it takes a lot of pain and effort to
walk that way. A dog's natural position is on four legs.

Some Useful Strategies
If you are a woman raising a son or have men in your life,
you need to understand that while they have excellent
spatial ability, most can still only do one thing at a time.
Most need help to organise their homework, diary and life
in order to be effective boys and men. These organisa146

tional skills come more naturally to girls and women.
Albert Einstein was a spatial genius but he didn't speak
until the age of five and he had almost no organisational
or interpersonal skills, as his hairstyle showed.
If you are a male in a spatially-related job such as
building or architecture, you need to understand that
most women need a three-dimensional perspective if
you are to be convincing.

Want to persuade a woman to go
with a certain set of plans? Show
her a three-dimensional version.
If you are recruiting women into spatially-related occupations such as engineering, the market for these
prospects is only about 10% of all women, so target
only those women. To attempt a marketing strategy to
encompass all women based on the fact that they make
up 50% of the population is a futile exercise.

In Summary
Ray and Ruth now get on well when they travel
together. He decides which route they will take and he
navigates. She talks and points out landmarks and he
listens, without interruption. She no longer criticises his
driving because she knows that his spatial ability lets
him take what she may consider a risk, but to him is
perfectly safe driving.
Ray bought a camera worth $3,000 with all types of
spatially-related gadgetry and Ruth now understands
why he loves it. When it's her turn to take a photograph, he sets everything up for her and shows her how
147

to take a good shot instead of laughing when she can't
work out how to turn it on.
When men stop asking women to navigate, everyone's
lives will be happier, and when women stop criticising
men's driving ability, there will be far fewer arguments.
We are all good at different things so, if you are not
good at a particular task, don't worry about it. You can
improve with practice but don't let it ruin your life. Or
that of your partner.

148

CHAPTER 6

THOUGHTS, ATTITUDES,
EMOTIONS AND OTHER
DISASTER AREAS

149

C

olin and Jill were driving to a party in an
unfamiliar area. According to the
directions, it should have taken them 20
minutes. It had already taken them 50, and there
was still no sign of their destination. Colin was
becoming grumpy and Jill started feeling despondent
as they passed the same garage for the third time.
Jill: 'Darling, I think we should have turned right
at the garage. Let's stop and ask directions.'
Colin: 'There's no problem. I know it's around here
somewhere ...'
Jill: 'But we're half-an-hour late already and the
party's started - let's stop and ask someone!'
Colin: 'Listen, I know what I'm doing! Do you want
to drive or are you going to let me?'
Jill:
'No, I don't want to drive, but I don't want
to go round and round in circles all night
either!'
Colin: 'OK then, why don't I just turn the car
around and we'll go back home!'
Most men and women will recognise this conversation.
A woman can't understand why this wonderful man
she loves so much suddenly turns into Mad Max on
steroids just because he's lost. If she was lost, she'd ask
for directions, so what's his problem? Why can't he just
admit he doesn't know?

150

Why did Moses spend 40 years
wandering in the desert?
He refused to ask for directions.
Women don't mind admitting mistakes because, in their
world, it's seen as a form of bonding and building trust.
The last man to admit he'd made a mistake, however, was
General Custer.

Our Different Perceptions
Men and women perceive the same world through
different eyes. A man sees things and objects and their
relationship to each other in a spatial way, as though he was
putting the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle together. Women
literally take in a bigger, wider picture and see the fine
detail, but the individual pieces of the puzzles and their
relationship to the next piece is more relevant than their
spatial positioning.
Male awareness is concerned with getting results,
achieving goals, status and power, beating the competition
and getting efficiently to the bottom line. Female awareness
is focused on communication, co-operation, harmony,
love, sharing and our relationship to one another.
This contrast is so great that it's amazing men and women
can even consider living together in the first place.

Boys Like Things, Girls Like People
Girls' brains are wired to respond to people and faces
but boys' brains respond to objects and their shapes.

151

Studies of babies from a few hours old to a few months
all show this one clear point: boys like things, girls like
people. Scientific, measurable differences between the
sexes show how each perceives the same world through
the bias of their differently wired brains. Baby girls are
attracted to faces and maintain eye contact two to three
times longer than boys, and baby boys are more interested in watching the movement of a mobile with
irregular shapes and patterns.
At 12 weeks old, girls can distinguish pictures of
family from strangers, while boys cannot, but boys are
better at relocating a lost toy. These differences are
obvious, long before social conditioning has had a
chance to take effect. Pre-school children were tested
with a pair of binocular eye-viewers that showed
objects to one eye and people's faces to the other eye.
The tests of the children's recall showed that girls
remembered people and their emotions and boys
recalled more about things and their shapes. At school,
girls sit in circles, talking and each mirroring the
group's body language. You cannot identify a leader.

Girls want relationships and cooperation, boys want power and status.
If a girl builds something, it is usually a long, lowprofile building with the emphasis on the imaginary
people who are in the building, whereas boys compete
to build a bigger and higher structure than the next
boy. Boys run, jump, wrestle and pretend they are aeroplanes or tanks, while girls talk about which boys they
like or how stupid some of the boys look. At preschool, a new girl is welcomed by other girls and they
all know each other's names. A new boy is usually
treated indifferently by other boys and is only included
152

in the group if the hierarchy feels he can serve a useful
purpose. At the end of the day, most boys would not
know the new boy's name or details, but they'd know
how good or bad a player he was. Girls welcome and
accept others and are even more sympathetic to
someone who may have a handicap or disability, but
boys are likely to ostracise or victimise the disadvantaged person.
Despite the best intentions of parents to raise boys and
girls in the same way, brain differences finally decide
preferences and behaviour. Give a four-year-old girl a
teddy bear or toy and she'll make it her best friend; give
it to a boy and he'll dismember it to see how it works,
leave it in pieces and then move on to the next.
Boys are interested in things and how they work, girls
are interested in people and relationships. When adults
reminisce about weddings, women talk about the
ceremony and the people who attended, men talk about
the 'stag night'.

Boys Compete, Girls Co-operate
Girls' groups are co-operative and you cannot visually
identify a leader. Girls use talk to show their level of
bonding and each girl usually has a best friend with
whom to share secrets. Girls will ostracise a girl who
exerts authority by saying, 'She thinks she's somebody'
or they call her 'bossy'. Boys' groups have a hierarchy
with leaders who can be identified by their superior or
assertive talk and body language, and each boy hustles
for status in the group. Power and status are allimportant in a boy's group. This is usually achieved
through a boy's skills or knowledge or by his ability to
talk tough to others or fight off challengers. Girls are
happy to build relationships with teachers and friends
153

while boys question teachers and prefer to explore the
spatial relationships of the world, and to do so alone.

What We Talk About
Listen to any group of men, women, boys or girls in any
country and you'll hear how the brain circuitry of each
sex causes them to talk about the same things differently.
Girls talk about who likes who or who is angry with who.
They play in small groups and share 'secrets' about others
as a form of bonding. As teenagers, girls talk about
boys, weight, clothes and their friends. As adults, women
talk about diet, personal relationships, marriage, children,
lovers, personalities, clothes, the actions of others,
work relationships and anything to do with people and
personal issues. Boys talk about things and activities who did what, who is good at something and how things
work. As teenagers, they talk about sports, mechanics
and the function of things. As men they discuss sports,
their work, news, what they did or where they went,
technology, cars and mechanical gadgets.
A 1999 survey of 1,000 telephone users by the British
cable phone company Telewest revealed what men and
women talk about on the telephone.

Friends
Sex/relationships
Work
Sports
Other

Men
30%
18%
25%
16%
11%

Women
53%
22 %
11%
2%
12%

A third of all women said their calls lasted at least
15 minutes and half the men said their calls were less
than 5 minutes.
154

Talking Dirty
Women have always assumed that men huddle in
groups for sleazy sex chats, but that isn't true. If a man,
in the company of other men, actually began to talk
about what he had done in bed the night before,
including operational details, his companions would
become speechless or leave. This is not because he is
ruining a woman's reputation, but because the speaker
might produce statistics, including times and centimetres, that the other men would have difficulty in
meeting. This is why men prefer to joke about sex.
While men have side-by-side friendships based on things
and achievement, women have face-to-face friendships
based on emotional sharing. That's why women's
arguments can be so hurtful - they know more personal
details about each other and have more ammunition to
hurl. Women are never withholding when it comes to sex
talk either. They freely discuss techniques, strategies,
times and sizes. And they are graphic in their descriptions.
What Modern Men and Women Want
A recent study conducted in five Western countries
asked men and women to describe the kind of person
they would ideally like to be. Men overwhelmingly
chose adjectives including bold, competitive, capable,
dominant, assertive, admired and practical. From the
same list women chose warm, loving, generous, sympathetic, attractive, friendly and giving. Women rated
being of service to others and meeting interesting people
as high on their scale of values, whereas men rated
prestige, power and owning things as important. Men
valued things, women valued relationships. The
structure of their brains dictated their preferences.
155

Emotion in the Brain
Canadian research scientist Sandra Witleson conducted
tests on men and women to locate the position of
emotion in the brain. Using emotionally-charged
images that were shown first to the right hemisphere
via the left eye and ear and then to the left hemisphere
via the right eye and ear. From MRI scans, she
concluded that men's emotion is located mainly in two
areas in the right hemisphere, and women's is located
throughout both hemispheres. New research indicates
that our emotions may be located in various organs in
the body in amino acids called neuropeptides and that
these areas revealed in brain scans are simply remote
controls for these neuropeptides.

For men, emotion is generally positioned in the right
brain, meaning that it can operate separately from other
brain functions. For example, in an argument, a man can
argue logic and words (left brain) and then switch to
spatial solutions (right front brain) without becoming
emotional about the issue. It's as if emotion is in a little
room of its own and a man's smaller corpus callosum
means that emotion is less likely to operate simultaneously with other functions.
156

For women, emotion operates on a more widely
spread area in both hemispheres and thus can operate
at the same time as other brain functions. A woman can
become emotional while discussing an emotional issue,
while a man is less likely to do the same, or he will
simply refuse to discuss the issue. This way, he can
avoid becoming emotional or appear not to be in
control. Overall, women's emotions can switch on
simultaneously with most other brain functions
meaning that she can cry while changing a flat tyre,
whereas a man sees tyre-changing as a test of his
problem-solving abilities, and will remain completely
dry-eyed even when he discovers, by the side of a
deserted road, at midnight, in the pouring rain, that the
spare is flat and he took the jack from the boot of the
car last week.

An emotional man can lash out
like a reptile; an emotional
woman prefers to 'talk about it'.
Ruben Gur, professor of neuro-psychology at the
University of Pennsylvania, pioneered similar research
and concluded that men's brains, being highly compartmentalised, deal with emotions on a more basic
animal level, similar to an attacking crocodile, whereas
a woman will 'sit down and talk about it'. When a
woman is talking with emotion, she uses expressive
facial signals, body language and a range of speech
patterns. A man who switches on his emotions is more
likely to go into a reptilian mode and lash out vocally
or become aggressive.

157

Women Value Relationships, Men Value Work
Modern society is a mere blip on the screen of human
evolution. Hundreds of thousands of years of living in
traditional roles has left modern men and women with
brain circuitry that causes most of our relationship
problems and misunderstandings. Men have always
defined themselves by their work and accomplishments
and women define their own self-worth by the quality
of their relationships. A man is a lunch-chaser and
problem solver - this had to be his priority for survival.
A woman is a nest-defender - her role was to ensure
survival of the next generation. All the studies
conducted on male and female values in the 1990s
continued to show that 70%-80% of men everywhere
still say that the most important part of their lives is
their work, and 70%-80% of women say the most
important priority is their families. As a consequence,

If a woman is unhappy in her
relationships, she can't concentrate
on her work. If a man is unhappy at
work he can't focus on his relationships.
Under stress or pressure, a woman sees spending time
talking with her man as a reward, but a man sees it as
an interference in his problem-solving process. She
wants to talk and cuddle, and he wants to watch the
football. To a woman, he seems uncaring and disinterested and a man sees her as annoying or pedantic.
These perceptions are the reflections of the different
organisation and priorities of their brains. This is why a
woman always says that the relationship seems more
158

important to her that it does to him - it is. Understanding this difference will take the pressure off you
and your partner, and you will not judge each other's
behaviour harshly.

Why Men 'Do Things'
A man's brain is organised to evaluate and understand
objects, their relationship to other objects, spatial
relevance, how it all works and solutions to problems.
His brain is programmed for a 'how-do-I-fix-it?'
response to life. Men use this 'fix it' criterion in their
approach to almost everything they do. One woman
told us that she wanted her husband to show a more
loving attitude towards her - so he mowed the lawn.
He saw this as an expression of his love. When she said
she still wasn't happy, he painted the kitchen. And
when this didn't work, he offered to take her to the
football. When a woman is upset she will talk emotionally to her friends, but an upset man will rebuild a
motor or fix a leaking tap.

To prove his love for her, he climbed the
highest mountain, swam the deepest
ocean, and crossed the widest desert.
But she left him - he was never home.
While women fantasise about love and romance, men
fantasise about fast cars, bigger computers, boats and
motorcycles. All these are things they can use and all
are related to spatial ability and 'doing something'.
159

Why Men and Women Leave Each Other
A man's biological urge is to provide for a woman and her
appreciation of his efforts confirms his success. If she is
happy, he feels fulfilled. If she is not happy he feels that he
is a failure because he believes he can't provide enough.
Men constantly say to their friends, 'I can never make her
happy,' and this can be sufficient motivation for a man to
leave a relationship for another woman who seems happy
with what he can provide.

A woman leaves a man not because
she is unhappy with what he can
provide, but because she is
emotionally unfulfilled.
She wants love, romance and conversation. He needs to
be told by a woman that he is successful at what he
does and what he can provide is fine. But a man needs
to be romantic and, most of all, listen when a woman
talks, without offering solutions.
Why Men Hate to Be Wrong
To understand why men hate to be wrong, it's
important to understand the history of where this
attitude came from. Picture this scene. The cave family
is crouched around a fire. The man is sitting at the cave
entrance gazing out, surveying the landscape and
scanning the horizon for signs of movement. The
woman and children have not eaten for days and he
knows that he must hunt at the first break in the
160

weather and not return until he has found food. This is
his role and his family are depending on him. They're
hungry but confident he can succeed as he has always
done. His stomach is churning and he is fearful. Will he
be successful again? Will his family starve? Will other
males kill him because he is weak from hunger? He just
sits there with a blank expressionless face - watching.
He must not show any signs of fear to his family as they
would become disheartened. He must be strong.

In being wrong, a man considers
himself a failure because he has
not been able to do his job properly.
A million years of not wanting to be seen as a failure seems
to be wired into the brains of modern men. Most women do
not know that if a man is driving in the car alone, he'd
probably stop and ask directions. But to do it when she is in
the car makes him feel like he is a failure because he couldn't
get her there.
When a woman says, 'Let's ask directions', a man
hears: 'You're incompetent, you can't navigate'. If she
says, 'The kitchen tap is leaking, let's call a plumber', he
hears, 'You're useless, I'll get another man to do it!'
This is also the reason men have difficulty saying, 'I'm
sorry'. They see it as admitting they are wrong, and to
be wrong is to fail.
To deal with this problem, a woman needs to make
sure that she doesn't make a man feel wrong when she
discusses problems with him. Even giving a man a selfhelp book for his birthday is often interpreted by him
as, 'You're not good enough.'

161

Men hate criticism - that's why
they like to marry virgins.
A man needs to understand that a woman's objective
is not to make him wrong; it's to help him and he
should not take things personally. A woman wants to
improve the man she loves but he interprets this as
meaning that he is not good enough. A man won't
admit mistakes because he thinks she won't love him.
But the reality is, a woman loves a man more when he
will admit mistakes.

Why Men Hide Their Emotions
Modern men still carry the ancient legacy of being
brave and showing no weaknesses. Women everywhere
ask, 'Why does he always have to be so strong?
Why can't he just show me how he feels?' 'When he's
angry or upset he bottles it up and becomes cut-off
or distant.' 'It's like pulling teeth to get him to discuss
his problems.'
By nature, a man is suspicious, competitive, controlled, defensive and a loner who hides his emotional
state to stay in control. For men, becoming emotional
is seen as being out of control. Social conditioning
reinforces these behaviours in men by teaching them
to 'act like a man', 'put on a brave face' and 'boys
don't cry'.
As a nest-defender, a woman's brain is pre-wired to be
open, trusting, co-operative, show vulnerability, reveal
emotions and know it's not necessary to stay in control
all the time. This is why, when a man and woman
encounter problems together, each is confused about the
other's reaction.
162

Why Men Hang Out with the Boys
For our caveman, the big food prizes were much larger
and stronger than him, so he organised himself into cooperative groups with others to form a hunting pack.
His superior brain allowed him to create the ancient
equivalent of football plays for hunting and he used a
system of body language signals to allow his hunting
strategies to be deployed.
These hunting packs consisted almost entirely of males
doing 'men's work', that is, throwing their spears at
lunch while the women, who were usually pregnant, did
'women's work' in tending to children, collecting fruits,
homemaking and defending the nest. The urge for men
to pack-hunt took millions of years to instil into the
male brain and no amount of training will remove it
overnight. And so modern men meet in hunting packs at
pubs and clubs to exchange jokes and tell stories about
their hunting activities and when they go home, most
still like to sit and gaze into the fire.
Why Men Hate Advice
A man needs to feel that he is capable of solving his
own problems and sees discussing them with others as
imposing a burden on that person. He won't even
bother his best friend with a problem unless he thinks
the friend may have a better solution.

Don't offer a man advice unless be
asks for it. Tell him you have confidence
in his ability to work things out.
163

When a woman tries to get a man to talk about his
feelings or problems, he resists because he sees it as
criticism, or feels that she must think he is incompetent
and she has a better solution for him. In reality, her
objective is to help him feel better and, for a woman,
offering advice builds trust in a relationship and is not
seen as a sign of weakness.

Why Men Offer Solutions
Men have logical, problem-solving minds. When a man
enters a room in a conference centre or restaurant for
the first time, he looks around and sees things that need
fixing, pictures that need straightening and better ways
of laying out the room. His brain is a problem-solving
machine that never takes a holiday. Even if he was on
his death bed in hospital he'd be thinking of better ways
to arrange the ward to take advantage of the natural
light and country views.

Talking about her problems is how
a woman gets relief from stress. But
she wants to be heard, not fixed.
When a woman talks about her problems, a man continually interrupts her and offers solutions. He can't
help himself because his brain is programmed to do
this. He thinks she will feel much better when she has a
solution. She only wants to talk and ignores his
solutions. This makes him feel incompetent and a
failure or that she is probably blaming him for her
problems. Women don't want solutions, they just want
to talk about things and for someone to listen.
164

Why Stressed Women Talk
Under stress or pressure, a man's main brain functions
of spatial ability and logic are activated. A woman's
speech function is activated and she starts talking, often
non-stop. If she's stressed, she talks, talks and talks to
anyone who will listen. She can talk about her
problems to her friends for hours, giving a thorough
report of details and then they all give the problem
another post-mortem. She talks about present
problems, past problems, possible problems and
problems that have no solutions. When she talks, no
solutions are sought as she receives comfort and relief
from the process of talking. Her talk is unstructured
and several subjects can be discussed at any one time
with no conclusions being reached.

For a woman, sharing problems
with her friends is a sign of
trust and friendship.
For a man, listening to her talk about problems is hard
work because he feels he is expected to solve each
problem she brings up as she talks aloud. He doesn't just
want to talk about it, he wants to do something about
it! He is likely to interrupt with, 'What's the point here?'
The point is that there doesn't need to be a point. The
most valuable lesson a man can learn is to listen using
listening sounds and gestures, and not to offer solutions.
To a man, however, this is an alien concept because he
only talks when he has a solution to offer.

165

When you're dealing with an upset woman,
don't offer solutions or invalidate her
feelings - just show her you're listening.
When a woman refuses to accept his solutions, his next
strategy is to try to minimise the problems by telling her,
'It doesn't really matter', 'You're overreacting', 'Forget
about it', and 'It's not a big deal'. This infuriates a
woman who begins to feel he doesn't care about her
because he won't listen.

Why Stressed Men Won't Talk
A woman talks outside her head, that is, you can hear
her, whereas a man talks inside his head. He doesn't have
strong brain areas for speech so this suits his mindset.
When he has a problem he talks to himself while she
talks to other people.
This is why, when under the pressure of problems or
stress, a man will clam up and stop talking. He uses his
right brain to try to solve his problems or find solutions
and he stops using his left brain to listen or speak. His
brain can only do 'one thing at a time'. He can't solve
problems and listen or talk simultaneously. This silence
is often distressing and frightening for a woman. A
women says to her husband, son and brother, 'Come
on, you've got to talk about it! You'll feel better!' She
says this because this is what works for her. But he just
wants to be left alone to firegaze until he comes up with
some solutions and answers. He doesn't want to talk to
anyone about it, especially a therapist, because he sees
that as a major sign of weakness.
166

The famous Rodin sculpture 'The Thinker' symbolises
a man thinking about his problems. He wants to sit on
his rock and think about solutions and needs to be alone
to do it. The key word here is alone - no-one is ever
allowed to go up on the rock with him, not even his
best friends. In fact, his male friends would not even
contemplate going up there. A women feels the urge to
climb up there with him to give comfort and she gets a
rude shock when he pushes her off!

Men climb on to their rock to
solve problems. Women who
follow them get kicked off.
If Rodin created a sculpture to personify a woman, it
would probably be called 'The Talker'. Women need to
understand that when a man is on his rock they need to
leave him there and let him think. Many women feel
that his silence means he doesn't love her or that he's
angry with her. This is because if a woman wasn't
talking, she'd be angry or upset. But if she leaves him
on his rock with a cup of tea and a biscuit and doesn't
press him to talk, he'll be fine. When he finally solves
his problem, he'll come down off his rock and feel
happy and begin to talk again.

Using Spatials to Solve Problems
The different ways men 'sit on their rock' include
reading a newspaper or magazine, playing squash,
fishing, tennis, golf, fixing something or watching television. A man who is under pressure is likely to invite
another man to play golf and when they play, there will
167

be limited conversation. The man with the problem goes
into his right brain to use his spatial skills to play golf
and can use this area to simultaneously work out
solutions for his problem. It seems that stimulating his
spatial area speeds up the problem-solving process.

Why Men Flick the TV Channels
A man flicking the channels with the remote control is
one of women's pet hates. He sits there like a zombie
just flicking, not paying attention to any particular
programme. When a man does this, he is mentally
sitting on his rock and often doesn't even see what's
happening on each station. He just searches for the
bottom line in each story. By channel-flicking he can
forget about his problems and look for solutions to
other people's. Women don't flick channels - they watch
a programme and search for the storyline, the feelings
and relationships of those involved in the story.
Newspaper addiction serves the same purpose for men.
Women need to understand that when men do these
things they can't hear or remember much, so it is
difficult to try to talk with them. Instead, make an
appointment and give him an agenda. Remember, his
forefathers spent over a million years sitting expressionless on a rock surveying the horizon, so this comes
naturally to him and he is comfortable doing it.

How to Get Boys to Talk
Mothers everywhere lament the fact their sons won't
talk to them. Their daughters come home from school
and pour their hearts out about everything, whether it's
significant or not. Males are programmed to 'do things'
168

and so this is the key to getting boys to talk. A mother
who wants to communicate more with her son should
get involved in an activity with him - painting, gym,
computer games - and then talk during the activity.

Boys don't like too much eye
contact, but mothers love it.
This way he can avoid too much eye contact, even
though the conversation may be disjointed because
he has to stop the activity from time to time to respond
to a question. It's difficult for him to do two things
at once, but the main objective here is to get him to
talk. The same strategy also works with a man but
don't talk to him at a critical time - like while he's
screwing in a lightbulb!

When They're Both Stressed
Uptight men drink alcohol and invade another country.
Uptight women eat chocolate and invade shopping
centres. Under pressure, women talk without thinking
and men act without thinking. That's why 90% of
people in jails are men and 90% of people who see therapists are women. When men and women are both
under pressure it can be an emotional minefield as each
tries to cope. Men stop talking and women become
worried about it. Women start talking and men can't
handle it. To help him feel better she tries to encourage
him to talk about the problem, which is the worst thing
she can do. He tells her to leave him alone and retreats
to another location.

169

Men need to understand that

when a woman is stressed, she
wants to talk, and all he needs
to do is listen, not offer solutions.
Because she's also under pressure, she wants to talk
about her problems, which frustrates him even more.
When he retreats to his rock she feels rejected and
unloved and calls her mother, sister or friends.

The Complete Shut-Out
This is one of the least understood stress differences
between men and women. A man will completely shut
everyone out when he is under extreme stress or needs
to find a solution to a serious problem. A man totally
disconnects the part of his brain that controls emotion,
goes into problem-solving mode and stops talking.
When a man uses the complete shut-out, it can be terrifying for a woman because she only does this when she
has been hurt, lied to or abused. A woman assumes that
this must also be the case with a man - she must have
hurt him and he doesn't love her anymore. She tries to
encourage him to talk but he refuses, thinking she
doesn't have faith is his ability to solve his problems.
When a woman feels hurt, she shuts off and a man
thinks she needs space and so he goes to the pub with
his friends or cleans the carburettor in his car. If a man
completely shuts off, let him do it, he'll be fine. If a
woman shuts off, there's trouble brewing and it's time
for deep discussion.
170

How Men Alienate Women
If a man suspects that a woman is stressed or has a
problem, he does what men do to other men - he walks
away and gives her some space to solve her problems.
He says, 'Is everything OK honey?', she replies, 'Yes,
fine...' which is indirect talk for, 'If you love me you'll
ask me about it'. But he says, 'That's good', and goes
off to work on his computer. She thinks, 'He's uncaring
and heartless' and calls her girlfriends. They talk about
how she feels and how insensitive her man is.
In the old days, men never had to face the problems
that modern men face. To show his love for his wife and
family a man did what men have always done - he went
to work and 'brought home the bacon'. This is the way
it has been for thousands of years and it comes naturally
to most men. In most countries the workforce now
averages around 50% females so many men are no
longer expected to provide completely for their families.
A man is expected to communicate: a skill that does not
come naturally to him. But the good news is, these skills
can be learned.
Why Men Can't Handle Women
Being Emotional
When a woman is upset or emotional she may cry, wave
her arms around and constantly talk using emotional
adjectives to describe how she feels. She wants to be
mothered, taken care of and listened to, but a man
interprets her behaviour based on his own priorities
and he hears her saying, 'Save me, fix my problems!'
So instead of being reassuring and comforting, he
offers advice, asks probing questions or tells her not to
be so upset. 'Stop crying!' he says with a terrified look
171

on his face. 'You're over-reacting! Things aren't that
bad!' Instead of mothering her, he becomes her father.
He saw his father and grandfather behave this way and
this is how men have behaved since they climbed out of
the trees. For a woman, her display of emotion is a
form of communication which she can get over and
forget quickly, but a man feels responsible for finding a
solution for her and feels like a failure if he can't think
of one. This is why, when a woman is emotional, a man
gets upset or angry and tells her to stop. Men also get
scared when a woman won't stop crying.

The Crying Game
Women cry more than men. Because of the way men
evolved they don't cry much, especially in public, and
social conditioning reinforces this. When a boy is
playing football and suffers a really painful injury he
might fall to the ground screaming, but a wild-eyed
coach shouts, 'Get up! Don't show the opposition they
hurt you! Be a man!'
The sensitive New Age Guy, however, is now
expected to cry any time, any place. He is encouraged
to cry by therapists, counsellors, magazine articles and
at retreats where men hug each other around camp
fires, deep in the forest. Modern men are accused
of being cold or dysfunctional if they don't 'let it
all out' at every opportunity. Because a woman's brain
can connect emotion to other brain functions it is
obvious why she can cry or become emotional under
most conditions.

Real men do cry., but only when the
emotion segment of the brain is engaged.
172

Real men do cry but only when they are tapping the
emotion segment of the brain, and men will rarely let
this happen in public. So be suspicious of the man who
does it regularly in public. Women have superior
sensory abilities compared to men. They receive more
detailed information than men and are more able to
express emotionally and verbally how they feel. A
woman may cry at being insulted because an insult is
usually emotionally charged but a man may not even be
aware that he has been insulted. It literally doesn't
mean much to him.

Eating Out
Women see eating out as a way to build and nurture a
relationship, discuss problems or support a friend. Men
see it as a logical approach to food - no cooking,
shopping or cleaning up. When eating out, women call
everyone by their first names because this builds relationships, but men will avoid any intimacy with other
men. If Barbara, Robyn, Lisa and Fiona go to lunch they
will call each other Barbara, Robyn, Lisa and Fiona. But
if Ray, Allan, Mike and Bill go out for a drink, they refer
to each other as Dickhead, Wanker, Numbskull and
Useless. These names avoid any hint of intimacy.
When the bill arrives, the women calculate who had
what. The men all throw $100 on the table indicating
they want to pay so they can grab the spotlight, each
pretending that they really don't want the change.

Shopping: Her Joy, His Terror
For women, shopping is like talking - it does not need
to have a specific point or objective and can take place
173

in an unstructured way over several hours. It doesn't
need a definite outcome. Women find shopping rejuvenating and relaxing, whether or not they buy anything.
This type of shopping gives a man a brain haemorrhage
within 20 minutes. For a man to feel energised he needs
an objective, a target to hit and a timetable. After all,
he's a lunch-chaser - that's his job. He wants to make a
quick kill and take it home.

Most men get a brain haemorrhage
after 20 minutes of shopping.
Men become anxious and frustrated in a dress shop
when a woman tries on outfit after outfit, asks for his
opinion and then buys nothing. Women love testing a
wide range of clothes because it fits the pattern of their
brain - a range of emotions and feelings and each
different outfit to reflect that mood. A man's clothing
reflects the male brainset - predictable, conservative
and bottom-line oriented. That's why it's easy to spot a
man who gets a woman to buy his clothes for him. A
man who is a good dresser usually has a woman
choosing his clothes or he's gay. One in eight men are
colour blind to either blue, red or green and most have
little ability to match patterns and designs. That's why
it's easy to spot a single man.
To motivate a man to go shopping, give him clear
criteria - colours, sizes, brands, styles - and tell him
where you will shop and for how long. With clear
objectives (even if you've invented them), you'll be
amazed at a man's shopping enthusiasm.

174

How to Give a Woman a
Sincere Compliment
When a woman tries on a new dress and asks a man,
'How does it look?', she'll probably receive a simple
response like 'good' or 'fine' which does not score any
points. To score good points a man needs to respond
the same way a woman would, by giving details.

Some men cringe at the thought
of responding in detail, but if
you are prepared to try it, you will
score big points with most women.
For example, if he said, 'Wow! Great choice! Turn
around, let me see the back. That colour really suits
you! The cut flatters your figure. Those earrings match
your outfit perfectly, you look wonderful,' most women
would be extremely impressed.

175

CHAPTER 7

OUR CHEMICAL
COCKTAIL

'Let me get this straight, Mrs Goodwin. You say you're suffering
PMT, you warned your husband that unless he
stopped flicking channels on the remote control you'd blow
his brains out ... How did he respond?'

176

eter asks Paula to go to dinner. They have a
great time. In fact, they get on so well they
decide to go steady and exchange friendship
rings. A year later they're driving home from the
movies and Paula asks Peter what he would like to do
to celebrate their first anniversary. Peter says, 'We
could order in some pizza and then watch the golf on
TV!' Paula becomes silent. Peter suspects there's a
problem and says, 'Well, if you don't want pizza we can
order Chinese.' Paula replies, 'Fine!' and remains quiet.
Peter is thinking, 'A year already! So it was January
when we started going out and that's when I bought this
car so it's due for its 12 months' service. That mechanic
said he'd fix that flicking oil light on the dashboard, and
that gearbox still isn't working properly!'
Meanwhile, Paula is thinking, 'He doesn't think much of
our relationship if he wants to watch TV and eat pizza on
our special anniversary. The next thing he'll want is his
friends over as well. I'd like a candlelight dinner, some
dancing and to talk about our future. This relationship
obviously isn't as important to him as it is to me. Maybe
he's been feeling confined by it. I want a stronger commitment from him but he's feeling threatened. Come to
think of it, sometimes I wish I had a little more space
myself so that I could spend more time with my friends. In
fact, I need more time to think about where this relationship is heading. I mean, where are we going? Are we just
going to keep dating or are we going to get married? Have
kids? Or what? Am I ready for this level of commitment?
Do I really want to be with him for the rest of my life?'

P

177

Peter notices the oil light flickering again, frowns
and thinks, 'Those idiots at the garage promised
they'd fixed that light and now the car's almost out
of warranty!'
Paula is watching him and starts on another train of
thought. 'He's frowning ... he's not happy ... I bet he
thinks I'm too fat and I should improve the way I dress.
I know I should wear less make-up and exercise more.
He always talks about how fit my friend Carrie is and
that I should go to the gym with her. I've talked to my
girlfriends about this and they think that Peter should
love me the way I am and not try and change me.
Maybe they're right!'
Peter's thoughts, however, are miles away. 'I'm gonna
tell those mechanics where to get off! I'll tell them to
go to ...'
Paula, still looking at Peter's face, thinks, 'He's really
upset now. I can see it on his face and I can feel his
tension. Maybe I'm reading him wrong ... maybe he
wants more of a commitment from me and he's sensed
that I'm feeling a little unsure about how I feel ...Yes,
that's it! That's why he's not talking to me ... he doesn't
want to open up to me about his feelings in case I reject
him. I can see the hurt in his eyes.'
Peter is thinking, 'They'd better get it right this time! I
told them I was having problems and they blamed the
manufacturer. They'd better not try and tell me the
problem isn't covered under warranty or they'll have a
fight on their hands. I paid a fortune for this car so they
can just ...'
'Peter?' says Paula.
'What?' snaps Peter, annoyed at having his thoughts
disturbed.
'Please don't torture yourself like this ... maybe I'm
wrong to be thinking this way ... Oh, I feel so bad ...
Maybe I just need some time ... I mean life wasn't
178

meant to be easy ...'
'That's for sure!' Peter grunts.
'You probably think I'm being foolish, don't you?'
'No,' says Peter, confused.
'It's just that ... oh, I don't know any more ... I'm confused ... I need some time to think about this,' she says.
Peter thinks, 'What the hell is she talking about? I'll
just say "OK" and she'll be over it tomorrow! It must be
that time of the month.'
'Thank you Peter ... you don't know how much this
means to me,' she says. Looking into his eyes she
realises he is a very special person and she will need to
think very hard about this relationship.
She tosses and turns all night and next morning calls
her friend Carrie to discuss it. They decide to meet for
lunch and talk about Peter and the problems.
Meanwhile, Peter went home, opened a beer and turned
on the TV. He thinks Paula has some sort of problem,
probably PMT.
Paula and Carrie meet next day and talk well into the
night. A few days later, Peter is talking to Carrie's
boyfriend Mark who says, 'So you and Paula are having
problems, eh?' Peter is now completely confused. I don't
know what she's talking about!' laughs Peter ' ... but
take a look at this oil light and tell me what you think.'
How Hormones Control Us
In the past, it was thought that hormones only affected
the body and not the brain. We now know that
hormones programme our brains before birth, dictating
our thinking and behaviour. Testosterone in teenage
boys is 15-20 times higher than in teenage girls and the
hormone flow in boys is controlled and regulated by the
brain as the body needs it.
179

At puberty, testosterone surges through an adolescent
boy's body, giving him a dramatic spurt of growth and
a body ratio of 15% fat and 45% protein. As he turns
into an adolescent, his body physically changes to match
his biological job description as a lean, mean, lunchchasing machine. Boys are excellent at sport because
their bodies are hormonally constructed for effective
breathing and they have excellent oxygen distribution
via the red blood cells to allow running, jumping and
grappling. Steroids are male hormones that build additional muscle and give athletes extra 'hunting' abilities
and an unfair advantage over non-steroid takers.
Female hormones have a different effect on teenage
girls. They are not regulated like a boy's hormones but
come in huge waves over a 28-day cycle and can cause
havoc for many girls and women due to the rise and fall
of emotions that go with it. Female hormones change a
girl's body into a ratio of 26% fat and 20% protein,
much to the frustration of females everywhere. The
purpose of the extra fat is to give additional energy for
breastfeeding and is insurance against times when food
may be scarce. Because female hormones fatten the
body, they are used to fatten livestock. Male hormones
reduce fat and build muscle so they're unsuitable for
animal fattening.

The Chemicals of Tailing in Love'
You've just met that special person. Your heart is
racing, your hands are sweating, you've got butterflies
in your stomach and you tingle all over. You go to
dinner together and you feel as high as a kite. At the
end of the evening, your date kisses you and it makes
you melt. For days after, you don't eat but you've never
felt better and you've noticed your cold is cured.
180

Neural evidence shows that the phenomenon of
'falling in love' is a series of chemical reactions taking
place in the brain that cause mental and physical
reactions. There are an estimated 100 billion neurones
that make up the brain's communication network.
Candace Pert, author of Molecules of Emotion (1999),
pioneered the research that discovered neuropeptides, a
string of amino acids that float around the body and
attach themselves to welcoming receptors. So far, 60
different neuropeptides have been discovered and they
trigger emotional reactions in the body when they
attach themselves to the receivers. In other words, all
our emotions - love, grief, happiness - are all biochemical. When English scientist Francis Crick and his associates won the Nobel Prize in Medicine for deciphering
the DNA code that defines genes, he stunned the
medical world by saying, 'You, your joys, sorrows,
memories, ambitions, your sense of identity, free will
and love are no more than the behaviour of a vast
assembly of nerve cells.'
The main chemical released to give you the elated
physical feelings of being in love is PEA (phenylethylamine) which is related to amphetamines and is found
in chocolate. This is one of the chemicals that makes
your heart race, hands sweat, pupils dilate and gives you
'butterflies' in the stomach. Adrenalin is also released,
speeding up your heart, making you alert and helping
you feel great. Along with that are also the endorphins,
which build your immune system and cure your cold.
When you both kissed, your brains made a rapid
chemical analysis of each other's saliva and it made
decisions on your genetic compatibility. The woman's
brain also made chemical determinations about the state
of the man's immune system.
All this positive chemical reaction explains why
people in love have been shown to have better health
181

and are much less likely to contract an illness than
those who are not. Being in love is usually great for
your health.

Hormonal Chemistry
Oestrogen is the female hormone that gives women an
overall feeling of contentment and well-being, and plays
a major role in a woman's nurturing and nest-defending
behaviours. Because of its calming effect, it is also given
to aggressive males in prisons to control violent
behaviour. Oestrogen also aids memory, which explains
why so many women suffer memory problems after
menopause when their oestrogen levels drop. Those
who are on Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT)
have better memory retention.
Experiments in June 2000 by Dr Agnes Lacreuse of
Emory University in Atlanta showed that as the ratio of
testosterone to oestrogen changes most women will
experience an enhancement in spatial memory. This
can make it easier for them to remember where car
keys, glasses or handbags have been left - or where
they parked the car.
Progesterone is the hormone that releases parental and
nurturing feelings and its purpose is to encourage a
woman to carry out her child-rearing role successfully.
Progesterone is released when a woman sees a baby and
research shows it is the baby's shape that triggers the
release of the hormone. A baby has short, stubby arms
and legs, a round, plump torso, oversized head and large
eyes, and these shapes are known as 'releasers'. The
reaction to this shape is so strong that the hormone is
also released when a woman sees these shapes in an
object like a stuffed toy. This is why toys such as teddy
bears and baby animals sell so well to females and long,
182

gangly-shaped toys don't. A woman or girl will pick up
a teddy bear and sigh, 'Ahh ... isn't it beautiful!' and
progesterone is released into her bloodstream.
Most men, lacking progesterone hormones, can't understand a woman's over-reaction to a piece of high-priced
stuffed merchandise. This could also explain why women
who are the mothering type marry short fat men with
chubby cheeks.

Look at these three illustrations. Seeing the baby causes
the release of progesterone hormone in women and the
toy bear has the same effect. There are no releaser
shapes in the third example so it will not release progesterone in a woman. The best selling toys have always
been plump dolls and baby animals with dilated pupils.

Why Blondes Have High Fertility
Blonde hair is a sign of high oestrogen levels and
accounts for men's strong attraction to blondes. It is an
indicator of fertility and is the likely explanation of the
phrase 'dumb blonde'. Dumb blondes, so the jokes go,
183

have high fertility and low mathematical reasoning.
Research has shown that teenage girls whose mothers
took male hormones during pregnancy perform better in
academic disciplines than other females, and are more
likely to get into university. The other side of the coin is
that these girls are described as less feminine in nature
and are likely to have more body hair.
After a blonde's first baby is born, her hair darkens
because her oestrogen level drops. It darkens even more
after her second child. The reduction in oestrogen levels
is why there are few natural blondes after age 30.
In the Roman era, prostitutes wore blonde wigs as an
advertisement for their trade and this gave rise to the
phrase, 'Blondes have more fun.'

PMT and Sex Drive
Pre-Menstrual Tension (PMT) is a major problem for
modern women and one with which their ancestors
never had to deal. Until recently, women tended to be
pregnant most of the time, which meant that the
average woman only ever had to deal with menstrualrelated problems 10 to 20 times in a lifetime, versus 13
times a year for modern women. If she has the average
of 2.4 children, this adds up to 350 - 400 times a
modern woman can suffer PMT symptoms in her childbearing years between ages 12 to 50, and close to 500
times for a woman without children.
Until the introduction of the contraceptive pill in the
1950s, no-one noticed that women had emotional highs
and lows. For the first 21 days after menstruation,
oestrogen hormones create a feeling of well-being and
give generally happy feelings and a positive attitude to
most pre-menopausal women. Sex drive gradually
increases so that she is most capable of conceiving at a
184

specific point, about midway through the cycle. This is
also the time when her testosterone level is the highest.
Nature is clever. It has a timetable for most female
animals that makes them randiest at the most likely
time for conception. This is easily observable in many
female animals. With horses for example, the female on
heat teases and excites the male but won't let him
mount until the exact second when the egg is in the
right position for fertilisation. Female humans are
unaware that a similar timetable and reactions apply to
them too.
This is how a woman may inexplicably find herself in
bed with a man she's just met at a party and the next
day is at a total loss to understand how or why it
happened. 'I don't know what happened,' said one
woman. 'I met him at a party and, before I knew it, we
were in bed together! I've never done that before!' Like
other female animals, she happened to meet this man at
the right time of the month and at the precise moment
for the highest chance of conception. His genetic makeup,
the state of his immune system and other male characteristics were decoded subconsciously by the
woman's brain. If they passed a certain rating level of
acceptability for being a potential father, nature took
control. Women who have experienced this event don't
know how to explain it, and many describe it as 'fate'
or 'a strange magnetic attraction', instead of understanding that their hormones simply took control. As a
result of these moments, many women get stuck in life
with men who are unsuitable partners. Most men
would give anything to know when a woman is at her
hormonal peak!
Scottish scientists studied the reactions and preferences of 104 women to digitally altered photos of
men. They found that during three weeks of the month
women preferred the smoother, more feminised,
185

sensitive looking types who would be more likely to be
around over the long haul. When the women were
ovulating, however, they favoured the manly-looking
men - big jaws, prominent eyebrows and larger bodies
- the stuff that screams virility. They also observed that
many ovulating women wore shorter skirts in public.
The scientists concluded that when it comes to settling
down, women want a male who is the best parental
investment. But when the biological bells are ringing,
they want Tarzan's genes.

Woman's Chemical Gloom
Between 21-28 days after menstruation, female
hormones dramatically drop, creating severe withdrawal
symptoms commonly known as PMT. For many
women, this causes feelings of doom, gloom, depression, and even suicidal tendencies. One in 25 women
suffer so severely from their hormones being out of
balance, she can undergo personality changes.
Several studies have found that most female crime
such as assault and shoplifting occurs during the 21-28
days pre-menstrual period. It has been found in
women's prisons that at least 50% of female murders or
assaults are committed by women suffering PMT.
Women's visits to psychiatrists, counsellors and
astrologers increase dramatically during this phase and
many women feel that they are 'losing control' or
'going crazy'. There are well documented studies
showing that women suffering PMT are four to five
times more likely to be involved in a car accident when
they are behind the wheel.
Female hormones have long been used as a way of
pacifying habitually aggressive people. In some
countries, PMT is a factor accepted by judges when
186

considering sentencing for women charged with
violent crimes.
When a woman reaches menopause, usually in her
40s or early 50s, she goes through a variety of psychological, emotional and hormonal changes. These vary
from woman to woman.
Menopause in men, however, is a uniformly predictable event - he buys aviator sunglasses, leather
driving gloves, gets a hair transplant, goes shopping for
a motorcycle or sports car, and wears funny clothes.

Testosterone: Bonus or Curse?
Male hormones, particularly testosterone, are the
aggression hormones that cause men to hunt and kill
prey. Testosterone is largely responsible for human
survival, as it drove men to catch food and fight off
attackers. It is also the hormone that makes men's
beards grow, causes baldness, deepens voices and
improves spatial ability. Bass baritones have been
shown to enjoy more than double the number of ejaculations in a week than tenors, and most people given a
course of testosterone have less difficulty reading maps
and street directories. Interestingly, left-handedness and
asthma have also been linked to testosterone and it is
now known that men who smoke or drink excessively
have reduced levels in their blood.
The downside of testosterone for modern males is
that unless it is allowed to vent itself in a physical
outlet, it may create aggression and can cause antisocial problems. As testosterone surges through their
bodies, boys aged between 12 and 17 enter the highest
male crime bracket. Give a passive man testosterone
and it will fire him up and he'll become more assertive
and self-reliant. The same dosage given to a woman can
187

also raise her aggression level, but will not have the
same degree of chemical effect as for a man. His brain
is pre-wired to react to testosterone while a woman's is
not. The reason for this is still uncertain, but it is
obviously related to spatial ability.

Women should watch out for lefthanded, bald, bearded accountants
with baritone voices who read
maps and sneeze at the same time.
As men reach their 50s and 60s, testosterone decreases
and they become less aggressive and more nurturing.
For women, the reverse happens. After menopause,
oestrogen levels decrease giving them a bigger ratio of
testosterone to oestrogen. This is why women
aged 45-50 suddenly become more assertive and
more self-reliant. The downside is that these women
are more likely to grow facial hair and suffer stress
and strokes.

The Case of the Flying Crockery
Author Barbara Pease was unaware that the new contraceptive pill she had been given contained a high level
of testosterone. Her husband, Allan, quickly learned
the valuable art of ducking from flying plates and other
airborne objects during Barbara's PMT phase, and
rediscovered his childhood facility for the short distance sprint. Interestingly, her parallel parking
abilities - or lack thereof - no longer started arguments.
They improved dramatically on this pill.
188

Blood tests eventually revealed Barbara's testosterone
excess and she changed to a pill without it. Within a
month, her mood swings had virtually ceased, but now
Allan felt he was living with a librarian studying to be
a nun. Another change of pill raised her testosterone
level back up to a happy medium, much safer both for
their marriage, and the household crockery.

Why Men Are Aggressive
Testosterone is the hormone of success, achievement and
competitiveness and in the wrong hands (or testicles)
makes men and male animals potentially dangerous.
Most parents are aware of the almost insatiable desire
that young boys have to watch violent movies and how
their sons can accurately recall and describe aggressive
scenes in detail. Girls are generally uninterested in these
types of movies. A study at the University of Sydney
showed that when confronted with a potentially aggressive conflict such as a schoolyard fight, 74% of boys
used verbal or physical aggression to solve the problem
whereas 78% of girls tried to walk away or negotiate
the situation. Ninety-two per cent of horn tooting at
traffic lights is done by men, while they also carry out
96% of burglaries and 88% of murders. Practically all
sexual deviants are male, and tests on deviant women
show high male hormone levels.

Ninety percent of the
people in prison are men.
Male aggression is mainly responsible for men's
dominance of our species. We don't teach aggression to
boys, we try to condition them away from it.
189

Aggression is one male trait that cannot be explained
by social conditioning.
Studies with sportsmen show their testosterone level
is significantly higher at the end of an event than before
it, demonstrating neatly how competition can build
levels of aggression. New Zealand sports teams are
often seen performing the Maori war dance, the haka,
immediately before the start of play. This serves two
purposes: to strike fear into their opponents and to
raise the testosterone levels of the performers.
Cheerleaders are used in many sports worldwide for
exactly the same reason, to raise the testosterone levels
of players and supporters. Studies confirm that higher
levels of crowd violence occur in matches where cheerleaders are used.

Why Men Work So Hard
Professor James Dabbs of Georgia State University took
saliva samples from men ranging from business leaders
and politicians to sportsmen, priests and convicts. He
found the top performers in each field had higher
testosterone levels than the poorer performers, and the
lowest counts were recorded by clergymen, indicating
less dominant and less sexually active lives. He also
found that high female achievers, such as lawyers and
sales people, had higher testosterone levels than the
average woman. In addition, he reported that not only
does testosterone lead to high levels of achievement, but
achievement causes more testosterone to be produced.
We have observed animal behaviour from Africa to the
jungles of Borneo and witnessed first-hand what scientists have spent years in researching - that the male
animals with the highest testosterone levels usually rule
the roost. The testosterone in some animals, such as
190

spotted hyenas, is so high that they are born with a full
set of teeth and are so aggressive that the young often
eat each other.

Creatures with the highest testosterone
levels rule the animal kingdom.
The top dogs, cats, horses, goats, and monkeys are
those that record the highest level of male hormone. Put
two women together and the one with more testosterone will dominate the interaction. Working women
have higher levels than women who stay at home, and
daughters of working women have higher levels than
daughters of non-working women. Among 700 male
prison inmates in a 1995 study, those with the highest
testosterone levels were most likely to be in trouble
with the authorities or engage in unprovoked violence.
A 1998 study found that trial lawyers, with their life of
conflict and argument, had higher levels than other
lawyers. High testosterone males have dominated the
human race throughout history and it is a reasonable
assumption that outstanding women leaders in history
like Boadicea, Margaret Thatcher, Joan of Arc and
Golda Meir received additional male hormone at the
six to eight week foetal stage.
There is a serious downside, however, to constant
levels of unburned testosterone. A chilling example
recently came from America where 118 Law students
were given the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Assessment and their lives were tracked and monitored
for 30 years. Those with the highest hostility and
aggression levels were four times more likely to have
died during the period. As society becomes less physical
and more cerebral and women replace men in many
industries, we will have to find new ways to channel
191

male testosterone. There is a growing focus on
muscular male physique in popular culture, a boom in
crass men's magazines and an explosion in violent
computer games. This is known as cultural displacement and this happens when the power of testosterone
is ignored or attacked, so it re-emerges in cruder, less
social forms. These are good reasons for young boys to
be encouraged to make a life habit of being physically
active on a regular basis.

Testosterone and Spatial Ability
You may have already reached the conclusion that
because spatial skill is one of the strongest male attributes, it is linked to testosterone. In Chapter 3 we saw
how testosterone is mainly responsible for configuring
the brain of the genetic male foetus (XY) and installing
the 'software' related to the spatial abilities required for
hunting and chasing. Consequently, the more testosterone the body produces, the more male-orientated the
brain's behaviour will be. Male rats which are injected
with additional male hormone find their way out of a
maze quicker than normal male rats. Female rats also
improve their navigational performance, but not as dramatically as the males. The aggression level of both
sexes increases.
In the Brain-Wiring Test, high testosterone males score
between -50 and +50 and usually have less difficulty
with map-reading, orienteering, playing video games or
hitting a target. They have fast-growing beards, love
'hunting' sports like football, billiards and motor racing
and are good reverse parkers. Testosterone is also the
hormone that aids single-mindedness and helps avoid
fatigue. Studies show that volunteers injected with
testosterone show greater endurance in physical activi192

ties such as walking and long-distance running, and can
concentrate for longer periods of time. Not surprisingly,
lesbians also have many of these attributes. Susan
Resnick of the Institute of Ageing in the US reported in
her findings that girls who received abnormal amounts
of male hormone in the womb also had far superior
spatial skills compared to their sisters who did not
receive the hormone.

Why Women Hate Reverse Parking
While testosterone will improve spatial ability, the
female hormone, oestrogen, suppresses it. Women have
dramatically less testosterone than men and, as a result,
the more feminine the brain, the less the spatial ability.
This is why very feminine women are not great reverse
parkers or map readers. There is a rare condition
known as Turner's Syndrome where a genetic female
(XX) is missing one of the X chromosomes and she
is known as an XO girl. These girls are super-feminine
in all their behaviours and have little or no directional
or spatial ability. Never lend your car keys to an
XO woman.
Chinese men test significantly lower than Caucasian
men in testosterone levels and this is evidenced by their
lack of facial hair and low incidence of baldness.
Chinese societies report comparatively low numbers of
men being charged with violent or aggressive crimes,
compared to Caucasian or black men. Rape is less
common than among Caucasian men, probably
because of lower testosterone levels. This also explains
why Asian men generally tested lower on their ability to
reverse park.

193

Mathematics and Hormones
Boys use their right front brain to solve mathematical
problems. The spatial area for girls is located on both
sides of the brain and tests show that many females use
the left front verbal side of the brain to attempt to solve
mathematical problems. This is the likely explanation
for so many women counting aloud. It also goes a long
way to explaining why girls are generally better than
boys at basic calculus and their co-operation and commitment to study often gives them the edge over boys in
arithmetic or mathematical exams.
Brain development in girls occurs much earlier than in
boys, which partially explains why they do better
earlier. But after puberty boys catch up and excel in
mathematical reasoning as testosterone boosts their
spatial ability. Tests of mathematical ability were
carried out by Johns Hopkins University in Boston on
gifted children aged between 11 and 13. They discovered that the more difficult the tests became, the more
the boys' ability exceeded that of the girls. At the easier
levels, gifted boys beat gifted girls on a ratio of 2:1; in
the middle levels the ratio increased to 4:1; and at the
highest degree of difficulty it reached 13:1.
In 1998, Canadian brain research authority Dr
Doreen Kimura found that if you double or triple the
amount of testosterone in a male, it does not necessarily
double or triple his mathematical reasoning skills. This
shows that there is probably an optimum level for
testosterone effectiveness somewhere in the low to midrange levels. In other words, King Kong will not necessarily show better mathematical reasoning ability than
a man with a slow growing beard. Interestingly, testosterone does improve women's mathematical reasoning
more dramatically than it does for men. A woman with
a moustache is therefore much more likely to make a
194

better engineer than one who looks like a Barbie doll.
Men score higher in map-reading ability in the autumn
when their testosterone is at its highest levels.

Girls suffering PMT get lower
scores in mathematical exams.
The education system favours boys and disadvantages
girls in mathematical exams because studies show that
girls suffering PMT have testosterone levels that are significantly lower during this phase. One study showed
that girls with PMT scored 14% lower in mathematical
exams when they had PMT than girls who weren't
suffering PMT. A fairer system would be to arrange
exams to take place at a time that is biologically more
suitable for girls. Boys can take the tests at any time.

Modern Man's Hunting
Sport is the modern replacement for hunting. Most
sporting activities began after the year 1800; prior to
that, most of the world's population still hunted animals
for food or recreation. The Industrial Revolution of the
late 1700s and advanced farming techniques meant that
it was no longer necessary to chase and catch food.
Thousands of years of men being programmed to hunt
suddenly came to a stop and had nowhere to go.
Sport became the answer. More than 90% of modern
sports were created between 1800 and 1900 and a few
new ones appeared during the 20th Century. Most
sports involve running, chasing and hitting targets and
allow high testosterone individuals to burn up excess
hormones. Research shows that boys who are physically
active are the least likely to be involved in crime or
195

aggression, and that young men with criminal records
showed the least involvement in sports. Simply, if it's
not burnt up on a playing field, it can show up in antisocial ways. On motorways and freeways, road-rage
has been almost entirely a male offence. Men compete
with each other on the road - women just happen to be
there at the time.
Before enrolling in a sports club, examine the objectives, values, role-models and leaders of the club. If
they're in it 'for the game' and the game is allimportant, then these people are still slaves to their
biology - so join a fishing club. There are many clubs
like yoga or martial arts that still teach the principles
for effective living such as health, relaxation and sound
life values. Avoid any clubs that emphasise the financial
gains members might make.

Why Men Have Pot Bellies and
Women Have Large Rears
Nature distributes excess fat tissue as far from the
body's vital organs as possible so as to not impede their
effective operation. Usually there is little or no fat
around the brain, heart and genitals. Women have additional vital organs - ovaries. Consequently, women
capable of bearing children tend not to accumulate
excess fat on the belly. Men, having no ovaries, accumulate this excess fat in what is usually called a 'pot
belly' and they also get fat on the back. That's why you
rarely see men with fat legs. Women's excess fat is distributed on their thighs, rears and under the upper arms
to be used as a source of nourishment in breast-feeding.
If men had ovaries, they would have bigger thighs and
flat bellies too. If the ovaries are removed in a hysterectomy, nature will redistribute fat to the belly.
196

CHAPTER 8

BOYS WILL BE BOYS, BUT
NOT ALWAYS

197

What makes a woman a woman and a man a man? Is
being gay really a choice? Why does a lesbian prefer
women? How did transsexuals manage to get a foot on
both sides of the fence? Are you who you are because
you had an aggressive mother, or your father was
emotionally cold or detached, or was it that you had a
crush on your Third Year teacher? Are you who you are
because you're a second-born child, raised in poverty,
orphaned, from a broken family, a Leo on the cusp of
Scorpio or perhaps re-incarnated from a cat?
In this chapter we will look at what happens
when a human foetus receives too much or too little
male hormone.

Gays, Lesbians and Transsexuals
Research shows that the basic template for the body
and brain of a human foetus is female in its structure.
As a result men have some redundant female features
such as nipples. Men also have mammary glands which
do not function but retain the potential to produce
milk. There are thousands of recorded cases of lactation
in male prisoners of war where starvation led to a
diseased liver failing to break down the hormones
essential for breast-feeding.
As we now know, six to eight weeks after conception, a
male foetus (XY) receives a massive dose of male
hormones called androgens which first forms the testes,

198

and then a second dose to alter the brain from a female
format to a male configuration. If the male foetus does
not receive enough male hormone at the appropriate
time, one of two things may happen. Firstly, a baby boy
may be born with a brain structure that is more
feminine than masculine, in other words, a boy who
will most likely be gay by puberty. Secondly, a genetic
boy may be born with a fully functioning female brain
and a set of male genitals. This person will be transgender. This is a person who is biologically male but
feeling as if he is a female. Sometimes a genetic male is
born with a set of both male and female genitals.
Geneticist Anne Moir in her ground-breaking book
Brainsex documents the many cases of genetic boys
being born looking like girls and being raised as girls,
only suddenly to find that they have penis and testicles
that 'appear' at puberty.
This genetic oddity was discovered in the Dominican
Republic and a study with the parents of these 'girls'
shows that their parents typically raised them as girls
and encouraged stereotypical behaviours such as
feminine dress and playing with dolls. Many of these
parents were then shocked to discover that they'd
ended up with a fully fledged son at puberty when male
hormones took over and their 'daughters' suddenly had
a penis and reverted to male appearance and typical
male behaviour patterns. This change occurred despite
all the social conditioning and social pressures for
female behaviour.
The fact that most of these 'girls' successfully lived the
rest of their lives as males highlights the point that their
social environment and upbringing had a limited
impact on their adult lives. Clearly, their biology was
the key factor in creating their behavioural patterns.

199

Homosexuality is Part of History
Among the ancient Greeks, homosexuality was not
only permitted, it was highly respected. The slim,
boyish, youthful figure was their ideal of beauty, and
paintings and statues were erected in its honour. Poems
were written about the love that prominent older men
had for young men. The Greeks believed that male
homosexuality served a noble, higher purpose and it
inspired youths to become worthy members of the
community. They also found that young gay men
proved to be some of their most courageous, successful
warriors as they would fight 'side-by-side in love with
each other'.

In Roman times, Julius Caesar
was described as 'every woman's
man and every man's woman.'
When Christianity frowned on same-sex relationships
and God reportedly brought his vengeance down on the
City of Sodom, homosexuality was banned, disappeared into the closet and wasn't seen in public again
until recently.
The Victorian era refused to acknowledge that homosexuality existed and, even if it did, it must be the
Devil's work and would be severely punished. As we
enter the 21st Century, most older generations still
believe that homosexuality is a recent phenomenon and
an 'unnatural' act. The reality is that it has been around
for as long as male foetuses missed out on their sufficient share of male hormones. Amongst primates,
homosexual behaviour is used as a way of bonding
members of a group or as a form of showing submis200

sion to a superior, as is also the case with cattle, cocks
and dogs. Lesbianism gained its name from the Greek
island of Lesbos. It has never been looked upon with
the same contempt as male homosexuality, probably
because it is associated more with intimacy, and not
labelled so much a 'perversion'.

Is it Genetic or a Choice?
When Body Language author Allan Pease and geneticist Anne Moir appeared together on British television
in 1991 for the launch of their books Brainsex
(Mandarin Books) and Talk Language (HarperCollins),
Moir revealed the results of her research which highlighted what scientists have known for years - homosexuality is inborn, not a choice.
Not only is homosexuality mostly inborn, but
the environment in which we are raised plays a
lesser role in our behaviour than was previously
thought. Scientists have found that as an adolescent or
adult, parents' efforts to suppress homosexual tendencies in their off-spring has practically no effect.
And because the impact of male hormone (or lack of it)
on the brain is the main culprit, most homosexuals
are males.

There is no solid evidence that upbringing affects the likelihood of a child
becoming homosexual.
For every lesbian (female body with a masculinised
brain) there are about eight to ten gay men. If the gay
and lesbian movement was to embrace this research
201

and, if the education system taught these findings,
homosexual and transsexual people would not
encounter as much prejudice. Most people are more
tolerant and accepting of a person who has inborn differences than they are of a person who, in their opinion,
makes an unacceptable choice. Take, for example,
Thalidomide babies, Parkinson's sufferers, autism or
people who have cerebral palsy. The public is more
accepting of these people because they are usually born
with these conditions, as opposed to homosexuals who
supposedly choose their lifestyle.
Can we be critical of a person who is born left handed or dyslexic? Or with blue eyes and red hair? Or
with a female brain in a male body? Most homosexual
people believe that their homosexuality is a choice and,
like many minority groups, often use public forums to
display their 'choice', which generates negative
attitudes from many members of the public.

He was a dyslexic, agnostic insomniac.
He'd lie awake all night wondering
if there really was a dog.
Sadly, statistics show that over 30% of teenage suicides
are committed by gays and lesbians, and that one out of
every three transgenders commits suicide. It seems that
the realisation of being stuck in the 'wrong body' for
the rest of their lives is too much for them. A study into
the upbringing of these homosexual teenagers has
shown that most were raised in families or communities
that taught hatred and rejection towards homosexuals,
or in religions that had tried to save some of the
'victims' with prayer or therapy.
202

Why People Look to the Father
When a boy turns out to be gay, the father may often
be blamed. Family members claim that he criticised the
son for not being involved with, or competent at, male
pursuits as he grew up. This theory holds that the boy
rebelled against the father and became gay to spite him,
but there is no scientific evidence to support this view.
The likely explanation is that the boy was more interested in female pursuits rather than football, motorcycle
racing, cars or boxing matches. This would have been
a constant source of annoyance for a father with high
expectations of his son's male development. In other
words, the son's effeminate tendencies are more likely
to have contributed to the father's critical or aggressive
attitude than vice versa.

Red hair and freckles has the same
occurrence as homosexuality.
If the public understood that scientific evidence shows
that most, if not all homosexuality is inborn, there
would be as much interest in a gay rally as there would
be in a rally for people with red hair and freckles, a
genetic combination that occurs at the same rate as
homosexuality. The public would be more accepting of
homosexuality and gays and lesbians would not have as
many problems with self-esteem, and would be treated
with more dignity, and far less rejection and ridicule.
Ignorance on both sides keeps both apart.

203

Can the 'Choice' Be Changed?
Gays and lesbians do not choose their sexual orientation
any more than heterosexuals do. Scientists and most
human sexuality experts agree that homosexuality is an
orientation that is unchangeable. Researchers believe
that most homosexual orientation develops in the
womb, that homosexual patterns are firmly fixed by
around age five and that it is outside the control of the
person. For centuries, techniques have been used to
suppress homosexual feelings in 'sufferers' which have
included breast amputation, castration, drug therapy,
uterus removal, frontal lobotomy, psychotherapy,
electric shock therapy, prayer meetings, spiritual counselling and exorcism. No therapies have ever succeeded.
The best they have been able to achieve is to make some
bisexuals confine their sexual activities to members of
the opposite sex or force some homosexuals to become
celibate through guilt or fear, and to push many others
to suicide.

Scientists have shown that
homosexuality is an orientation
that is unalterable. It's not a choice.
There is a greater than 90% chance that you, the reader,
are heterosexual. Think about how difficult it would be
to feel sexually attracted to someone of your own sex
and you will begin to understand how it is virtually
impossible to create feelings that do not already exist. If
it was a choice, as many proclaim, why would any intelligent person choose a way of life that exposes them to
so much hostility, prejudice and discrimination?
Hormones are responsible, not human choices.
204

The Case of Identical Gay Twins
Extensive research has been carried out on identical
twins who were separated at birth and raised in
different families and environments. Numerous tests
have been conducted to reliably establish whether
certain human traits are genetic or determined by social
conditioning. This type of research shows that many
human traits are genetically inherited, including neuroticism, depression, introversion/extroversion levels,
dominance, a facility for sport and the age of first
sexual activity. Assuming that around five percent of
the male population is gay, if you analysed 100 gay
identical male twins who had been separated from their
twin at birth then you would expect that around five
percent of the other twins would also be gay, based on
the assumption that homosexuality is a choice. Various
research groups who studied this question have all
come up with the same answer. That answer has been
demonstrated by American researchers Dr Richard
Pillard of Boston University and psychologist Michael
Bailey of North Western University who studied the
sexual orientation of sibling boys raised together. Their
conclusions were:
The chance of sibling homosexuality is:
• 22% for non-identical twins
• 10% for non-twin or adopted brothers
• 52% for identical twins who share the same genes
The collective research into the gay identical twins who
were separated at birth, reveals that over 50% of the
lost twin brothers were also gay. Of these, the
researchers generally agreed it was likely that
10%-20% of the twins who claimed to be heterosexual
were probably homosexuals who were too deep
205

inside the closet to admit it, or bisexuals who chose to
describe themselves as heterosexual. This brings the
real percentage of gay twins with identical genetic
make-up to between 60%-70%, or two out of three,
proving convincingly that most homosexuality is
created in the womb. It also confirms that upbringing
has little, if any, impact on sexual orientation.

It's in their Genes
Based on the theory that gayness is created in the
womb, you would expect that all identical gay twins
would also be gay, so why is this not the case with the
other 30%-40% of the gay twin brothers? Genes have a
property called 'penetrance' which is a measure of the
gene's power to become effective, and determines how
likely that gene is to be switched on and become a
dominant gene. For example, the variety of gene that
causes Huntington's disease is 100% penetrant,
whereas the gene that causes Type One diabetes is only
30% penetrant. This means that if identical twins each
have both the Huntington's gene and the diabetes
gene, each has a 100% chance of developing
Huntington's disease but only a 30% chance of developing diabetes.
Those carrying the 'gay gene' as it is now called, have
a 50%-70% chance of becoming gay and this theory
explains why all the identical twins brothers were not
gay. It is estimated that about 10% of all males carry
the 'gay gene' and about half these males will become
gay due to the 50%-70% penetrance factor of the gene.
Laboratory experiments with rats and monkeys have
proved that this sequence of events also happens in
other species. While performing these types of sexaltering experiments on humans is illegal, and consid206

ered to be ethically wrong, we are aware that these have
been successfully conducted in Russia with the same
conclusive results.

The 'Gay Gene'
Dean Hamer of the National Cancer Institute in the
USA compared the DNA of 40 pairs of homosexual
brothers and discovered that 33 had the same genetic
markers in the X928 region of the X chromosome,
which has been determined to be the approximate
location of the gay gene. He also compared the DNA of
36 pairs of lesbian sisters but no corresponding pattern
was found. This study further shows that not only is
homosexuality mainly a condition affecting males but it
is almost certainly genetic. The likelihood of the gene
becoming penetrant appears to be largely dependent
on the presence of the testosterone hormone six to
eight weeks after conception. In addition, there is a
small chance that other factors, including social conditioning, may activate the gene in early life, usually
before age five.

Gay Fingerprints and Family Studies
In 1998, Canadian brain research pioneer Dr Doreen
Kimura reported that she had conducted a study of the
number of ridges between two specific points on a
person's fingerprints. She discovered that people with
high ridge counts on the left hand are better at
'feminine' tasks.
She found that most men have more ridges on their
right hands, but that, on average, women and homosexual
men are likely to have more ridges on their left hands.
207

Fingerprint ridge counts

Another study of gay men by the National Cancer
Institute has shown that homosexuality runs in
families. Data collected on the genetic family members
of 114 gay men shows there is a three times greater
than average chance that gay men's brothers, uncles,
cousins or parents were also gay. Most of the gay male
family members were on the mother's side of the family
and fewer were on the father's side. This can only be
caused genetically, and it indicates that there is a special
gene somewhere on the X chromosome. This chromosome is the only one a mother can provide (she has two
Xs), further demonstrating the genetic transferability of
male homosexuality.

Experimental Changes
Rats are a favourite for scientific research. They have
hormones, genes and a central nervous system like
humans, but their brains do not develop in the womb
like a human's - they develop after birth which allows
us to see what's going on. Castrate a male rat and he
thinks he's a she and becomes a social, nest-building
rat. Give testosterone hormones to a newborn female
rat and she thinks she's a he, becomes aggressive and
tries to mount other female rats. Some female birds,
such as canaries, can't sing but if they are injected at a
208

young age with testosterone, they can sing like a male.
This is because testosterone affects the wiring of their
brain and therefore their abilities.
To achieve this sex-changing result the brain must be
altered when it is in an embryonic state. Similar tests on
adult rats, birds and monkeys failed to produce such
dramatic results because the brain is 'set' during the
embryonic stage. For humans the brain is 'set' six to
eight weeks after conception. It means that older rats
won't change much and neither will older humans.
During a seminar tour of Russia, we met a professor
of brain surgery from a local university who disclosed
to us that secret brain-altering experiments had been
carried out in Russia on humans for some time and that
their results were the same as with the rats - they had
changed boys into girls and girls into boys by altering
their brains in the womb with male hormone. They
created their own gay, lesbian and transsexual people.
He also reported that there had been occasions where
the foetus was not given enough male hormone or was
given the hormones at the wrong time of its development. One result was a baby boy with two sets of
genitals - a male set and a female set. This genetic
accident also occurs from time to time in nature (as it
has done in the Dominican Republic) and explains how
a baby is born looking like a girl and then suddenly
becomes a boy at adolescence.
This research shows what scientists know but are
not willing to discuss - that, by controlling the sex of
the brain with hormones, the sexuality of a foetus can
be determined before birth with an injection of a
needle at the right time. This would, however, and
quite understandably so, raise obvious moral, ethical
and humane questions.

209

It's What Happens in the Womb
If, during the early stages of pregnancy, testosterone is
suppressed and the foetus is male, the chance of giving
birth to a gay boy dramatically increases because
female hormones become the hormones used to
configure the brain. One German study in the 1970s
showed that mothers who suffered severe stress during
early pregnancy had six times the chance of giving birth
to a gay son. Research by Professor Lee Ellis of the
Department of Sociology at Minot State University in
North Dakota also showed that stressed pregnancies
equal gay babies. If the foetus is a girl, a baby daughter
may become super-feminine and will probably have
poor spatial ability. In other words, she's very
mothering and nurturing but can't reverse park or find
North. Brian Gladue of North Dakota State University
has shown that heterosexual men have better spatial
skills than homosexual men, and lesbians have better
spatial skills than heterosexual women. Why? More
male hormone was involved in the wiring of their
brains. So what suppresses testosterone? The main
factors are stress, sickness and some medications.
We have known for some time about the dangerous
effects of alcohol and nicotine on the unborn baby and
of the positive effects of the right diet and stress-free
living. New research by experts such as Dr Vivette
Glover at London's Chelsea Hospital shows that
pregnant women who suffer stress give birth to babies
who are also unable to deal with stressful situations. Dr
Glenn Wilson of the Institute of Psychiatry in London
has also studied this area extensively. He concluded,
'Certain chemical drugs can interfere with testosterone
function and the result can be the birth of a gay baby.'
If the foetus is a genetic girl (XX) and the brain is
dosed in male hormone, the result is a female body
210

with male brain circuitry. As children, these girls are
usually called 'tomboys' and they play rougher and
harder than their female peers. They are likely to grow
more body and facial hair than other girls at puberty,
they are better at hand-eye and ball skills and as
adults are sometimes described as 'butch'. A high percentage become lesbians. Accidental dosing of male
hormones can occur if the pregnant mother is taking
certain medications that contain high levels of male
hormones, like some contraceptive pills, diabetic drugs
and other medications.
One study of diabetic women who were pregnant
during the 1950s and '60s shows a high ratio of baby
girls who became lesbians after adolescence because
their brains received too much male hormone from the
diabetic drug at the critical period of brain development
of the foetus.
Similarly, another study showed that women of the
same era who received female hormones such as
oestrogen in the belief that it would help pregnancy had
a five to ten times greater chance of giving birth to a gay
baby boy. It's not until adolescence that the brain
circuitry is switched on by the massive surge of
hormones that race through a teenager's body and the
real sexuality of the teenager becomes apparent.
Echoing these findings, researchers at the Kinsey
Institute in America found that mothers who had taken
male hormones during pregnancy had daughters who
were described as having high levels of self-reliance,
self-assertiveness and were likely to be involved in
aggressive sports such as kickboxing or football. As
children, many were described as 'tomboys'. Mothers
who had taken female hormones had more daughters
who were described as more 'feminine' and sons who
were softer and gentler than their peers, were more
dependent on others and were not physically active.
211

The Transsexual Brain
Transsexuals feel from early childhood that they were
born in the wrong-sex body. The area in the brain
essential for sexual behaviour is called the hypothalamus and this area is markedly smaller in women than
in men. Researcher Dick Swaab and his team from the
Netherlands Institute for Brain Research were the first
in 1995 to show that the hypothalamus in male transsexuals was female-sized or smaller. This further
confirms research showing that gender identity stems
from an interaction between the developing brain and
sex hormones . This theory was first proposed by
German scientist Dr Gunther Dorner who found that
the hypothalamus of homosexual men responded in the
exact same way as a female hypothalamus when
injected with female hormone. Swaab reported, 'Our
study is the first to show a female brain structure in
genetically male transsexuals.' In other words, it's a
woman's brain trapped in a man's body.
The psychiatric label for a transgender person is that
they are suffering Gender Identity Disorder and around
20% of these people undergo the sex-change operation.
This involves removing the testicles and cutting the
penis in half lengthways and removing the inside tissue.
The penis skin remains attached, the urethral tube is
realigned and the skin from the penis is then folded
inside a surgically made cavity to line an artificial
vagina. In some cases, the head of the penis becomes
the clitoris and is capable of orgasm. Tragically, the
suicide rate for transsexuals is five times that of the
general population. One in five attempt suicide.

212

Are we Slaves to our Biology?
Scientists know how to change the sexuality of rats and
monkeys in the womb. Some groups claim that we can
control our likes and dislikes by will or choice and they
insist that we can all reverse park or read street directories
with the same ease. But scientists know this is unrealistic.
You don't need to be a scientist to see that rabbits can't fly,
ducks are lousy runners, most women have difficulty
reading maps and men reading newspapers are
temporarily deaf. Understanding brain structure differences makes us more tolerant of each other and allows
us to have greater control over our destiny and to feel
positive about our inclinations and choices.
Human intelligence has evolved to a point where we
are more in control of our emotions than other animals
and can think through our choices. Other animals
don't think: they react to circumstances and this makes
them slaves to their biology. Our biology is the motivation behind many of the choices we make that
sometimes don't seem to make sense to us. So while
we are more in control of ourselves than most
other animals, we still can't completely buck the
system. The biggest obstacle facing most people is their
rejection of the idea that we are just another animal
with a smart brain. This refusal makes these people
victims of their biology.
Why Gay Men Aren't All Alike

In simple terms, there are two main centres associated
with homosexual behaviour, the 'mating centre' and the
'behaviour centre'.
The 'mating centre' is located in the hypothalamus
and decides which sex we will be attracted to. In males,
213

it needs to be dosed in male hormones to convert it to
male operational function, so that a man will be
attracted to a woman. If it receives insufficient male
hormones it will remain, to a greater or lesser extent,
female in operation and so the man will be attracted to
other men.
The 'behaviour centre' in the brain may not, however,
receive enough male hormones to give a man masculine
behaviour, speech and body language. If it doesn't
receive enough for male reconfiguration, the man's
behaviour will be significantly feminine.
How the mating and behaviour centres can receive
different amounts of male hormone is still a mystery,
but it certainly demonstrates why not all effeminate
males are gay, and not all macho men are heterosexual.

Lesbian Differences
If the brain of a female foetus inadvertently receives
additional male hormones, it can masculinise the
mating centre. This means that as a woman she will
be attracted to other women. If her behaviour centre
is also masculinised, she will take on masculine
behaviour, speech and body language, and may be
described as 'butch'.
If her behaviour centre is not converted by male
hormones, on the other hand, she will remain feminine
in behaviour, but will still be attracted to other females.
These results have also been shown in experiments on
female rats and monkeys.
While 'butch' lesbians can be plainly seen to be the
result of their biology, many people today still resist the
idea that feminine lesbians are also prisoners of their
make-up. They suggest these women must have actually
chosen to be gay, because they most definitely do not
214

look gay. Just witness the number of men who say,
when they see a very feminine, or 'lipstick', lesbian, 'I
bet I could get her to change her mind'.
These women, however, really are attracted to other
women.

215

CHAPTER 9

MEN, WOMEN AND SEX

216

and Jeremy met at the party of a mutual
Stella
friend. The attraction was instant and spilled over
immediately into a fast and furious relationship. They
were both smitten and physically couldn't get enough
of each other. Their speciality was House Sex -sex in
the living-room, the bedroom, kitchen, bathroom,
on the staircase and in the garage. For Jeremy, the sex
was great, so he decided that Stella was the one for him.
It was wonderful for Stella too, so she decided she must
be in love. They were going to live together, forever.
Two years later, their sex life was still fast and furious
- he was fast and she was furious. Stella was happy
with sex twice a week, but Jeremy wanted it every day.
After all, he'd given up single life for this relationship
so he felt it was a fair trade-off. The more he insisted on
sex, the less she wanted it, and soon they were having
only Bedroom Sex. They started to fight over little
things, the kisses and cuddles slowly disappeared from
their everyday life and they were soon seeing only
negatives in each other. They even began going to bed
at different times and avoided each other. Now, all they
had was Hallway Sex - they'd pass in the hallway and
shout, 'Screw You!' One lonely night, one of them went
to a mutual friend's party and met someone. The attraction was instant and spilled over immediately into a fast
and furious relationship. They were both smitten and
physically couldn't get enough ...

217

How Sex Began
Life began with a single-cell creature about 3.5 billion
years ago. To survive, it divided itself to make exact
copies. It thus remained the same for millions of years
and only changed its appearance if, by accident, a
mutation in its structure occurred or it learned
something new by experience. Life was slow.
Then, about 800 million years ago, the cell learned an
amazing trick, again probably by accident. It somehow
figured out how to trade genes with other cells. This
meant that any survival advantages the other cell had
acquired could be passed immediately to a new baby
cell, making it stronger and more resilient than its
parents. It was now no longer necessary to wait
millions of years for an accident to mutate the cell
towards better survival.
This was an enormously successful development that
accelerated the growth of new cells towards bigger and
better things at a staggering rate of speed, beginning
with the soft-bodied creatures like worms and jellyfish.
Six hundred million years ago came animals with bones
and shells, and 300 million years later, the first fish
learned to breathe and dragged themselves on to the
land. And all as a result of gene trading.
Sex was now in full flight. Once the new cell was
created with its stronger genes it was necessary that the
parents died. This was for two reasons. Firstly, the new
cell was better than the parent cells so the parents were
unnecessary. Secondly, the parents needed to be
removed so that they did not breed with the new cell
and thus, weaken it. Death meant that the new,
stronger gene could survive and share its genes with
other new survivors. So the original purpose of sex was
to trade genes with someone else to create stronger
genes in the next generation of babies. For most of our
218

history, however, no connection was ever made
between sex and babies, and there are still several
primitive tribes who have not yet made this connection.

Where is Sex in the Brain?
Your sex centre is located in the hypothalamus which is
the part of the brain that also controls the emotions,
heart rate and blood pressure. It's about the size of a
cherry and weighs around 4.5 grams and is larger in
men than in women, homosexuals and transsexuals.
This is the area in which hormones, particularly
testosterone, stimulate the desire for sex. Considering
that men have 10 to 20 times more testosterone than
women and a larger hypothalamus, it's obvious why the
male sex drive is so powerful. This is the reason men
can have sex virtually any time and in almost any place.
Add to this the social encouragement that men have
received for generations to 'sow their oats' and society's
disapproval of sexually active women, and it's little
wonder the differences in attitude to sex have always
been a bone of contention between men and women
(no pun intended).

The brain's
sex centre the hypothalamus

219

Why Men Can't Help Themselves
Men's enthusiastic and impulsive sex drive has a clear
purpose - to ensure that the human species continues.
Like most male mammals, he had to evolve with several
elements for its success. Firstly, his sex drive had to be
intensely focused and not easily distracted. This would
allow him to have sex under almost any conditions, such
as in the presence of potential threatening enemies, or in
any place where a sexual opportunity presented itself.

A man needed to be able to
ejaculate as often as possible in the
shortest space of time to avoid being
caught by predators or enemies.
He also needed to spread his seed as far afield and as
often as possible. The Kinsey Institute in the US, world
leaders in human sex research, reported that, without
society's social rules, they believe nearly all men would
be promiscuous, as 80% of all human societies have
been for most of human existence. Since the arrival of
the age of monogamy, however, men's biological urge
has caused constant mayhem for couples trying to build
a relationship and is the number one cause of modern
relationship problems.
Why Women are Faithful
A woman's hypothalamus is much smaller than a man's
and she only has small amounts of testosterone to
activate it. This is why women, overall, have signifi220

cantly lower sex drives than men and are less aggressive.
So why didn't nature create woman as a raving nymphomaniac to ensure continuation of the species? The
answer is in the long period of time it takes to conceive
and to raise a child to self-sufficiency.
In species such as rabbits, for example, the gestation
period is only six weeks and the newborn bunnies are
capable of feeding themselves, running and hiding
within two weeks. There is no need for father rabbit to
be there to defend or feed them. A newborn elephant or
fallow deer is able to run with the herd shortly after
they are born. Even our closest cousin, the chimpanzee,
will survive if orphaned after six months. For a significant part of the nine-month human pregnancy period,
most women are physically restricted and it takes at
least five years before a human child can feed and
defend itself. For this reason, women closely analyse a
potential father's traits such as his ability to provide
food and shelter and fight off enemies.

Some men think that parenting
ends with conception.
A woman's brain is programmed to find a man who
will make a commitment to being around long enough
to rear her children. This is reflected in what women
look for in a long-term partner.

Men are Microwaves, Women are
Electric Ovens
Male sex drive is like a microwave - it ignites instantly
and operates at full capacity within seconds, and can be
turned off just as quickly when the meal is cooked.
221

Women's sex drive is like an electric oven - it heats
slowly to its top temperature and takes a lot longer to
cool down.
The following graph shows the sex drives of average
men and women throughout their lifetimes. It has not
been adjusted to reflect the various periods in life where
drives may be higher or lower based on environmental
factors such as births, deaths, courtship, retirement,
and so on. To demonstrate sex drive differences we've
simplified this graph to illustrate the differences.

A man's testosterone level slowly decreases as he gets
older and his sex drive decreases accordingly. The
average woman's sex drive gradually increases so that
her sexual peak is between the ages of 36-38, which
explains the 'toy boy' syndrome of the older
woman/younger man. Younger men have the physical
performance level an older woman craves. A man's
sexual performance level at age 19 is more compatible
with a woman in her late 30s to early 40s. You will also
222

notice on the chart that the sex drive of a man in his 40s
is compatible with a woman in her early 20s which
partly explains the older man/younger woman combination. There is usually a 10 to 20-year age difference
between these older/younger combinations.
When we say a man's sex drive peaks at age 19 and
falls in later life, we are talking about his physical performance level. His interest in sex is usually high for most
of his life, meaning that he can be just as interested at 70
as he was at 30 but his performance level is not as high.
A woman can be very interested in sex in her late teens
(because of its relationship to love) but feel limited desire
for sex. She can have the same interest in her 30s but at
that time she also has a greater desire for it.

Why We Argue About Sex
Bear in mind that we are talking here about the overall
sex drive of all men as one group and all women as
another. Individual sex drives vary from person to
person, but in this chapter we are discussing the typical
drives of most people.
An individual woman may have a high sex drive and
a man may have a low drive, but these are minority
cases and do not reflect the vast majority. Overall, most
men have a higher sex drive than most women. A study
at the Kinsey Institute showed that 37% of men think
about sex every 30 minutes. Only 11% of women think
of it as often. For a man, a continual high dose of
testosterone keeps his drive high and this is why, when
it comes to sex, he's ever ready.

When it comes to sex, women
need a reason; men need a place.
223

The shaded areas on the graph are where most men and
women argue about sex. Until her late 30s, a woman
will complain that a man constantly puts pressure on
her for sex, causing resentment on both sides. She will
often accuse him of 'using' her. It's not until her late 30s
that a woman's sex drive matches a man's, and often
surpasses it. Her drive is nature's way of pushing her
into last minute childbearing urges before the onset of
menopause. A man in his early 40s can often be caught
by surprise by this role reversal. His sex drive may be
lower than a woman's of the same age while her level of
assertiveness may be higher. Many men complain about
having to 'perform on demand'. The boot is now on the
other foot, so to speak. We recommend you read Good
Loving, Great Sex by Dr Rosie King and Mars And
Venus In The Bedroom by Dr John Gray. Both books
offer excellent techniques and strategies for handling
sex drive differences. Most couples don't address these
differences and each expects the other to understand
their needs, but that's not how nature planned it.
Men and women have different sex drives, and most
couples experience different levels of sex drive at
different times in their week, month and year. It may be
fashionable to suggest that modern men and women are
equally interested in sex, or that normal couples are
perfectly matched sexually, but that's not the way it is
in real life.
Despite what the poets write and the romantics might
think, sex drive results from the cocktail of hormones
released by the brain. Testosterone is the main hormone
that creates the feeling we call sex drive and, as
discussed in Chapter 7, love is a combination of
chemical and electrical reactions. Those who think that
love is all in the mind are partially correct. For women,
the psychological factors such as trust, closeness and
overall well-being all combine to create the conditions
224

under which the hormone cocktail is released by the
brain. Men can release this cocktail any time, any place.
Studies carried out on American University campuses
showed that when an attractive woman approaches a
man and asks him to go to bed with her, 75% say yes,
whereas no women said yes when approached by an
attractive man.

Sex Drive and Stress
A woman's sex drive is significantly affected by events
in her life. If she hates her job, she has a really
demanding project at work, the mortgage repayments
have just doubled, the kids are sick, she was drenched
in the rain or the dog ran away, sex will not even be a
consideration. All she can think about is going to bed
and sleeping.
When the same events happen to a man, he sees sex
as a sleeping pill - a way of releasing the built-up
tensions of the day. So, at the end of the day, he puts the
hard word on the woman, she calls him an insensitive
moron, he calls her frigid and he gets to sleep on the
couch. Sound familiar? Interestingly, when men are
asked about the state of their relationship they usually
discuss it in terms of their partner's personal services on
the day they were asked, for example, whether she
cooked him breakfast, ironed his shirt or massaged his
head. Women describe the condition of the relationship
based on recent events, for example, how attentive he's
been over the last few months, his helpfulness around
the house and how much he has communicated with
her. Most men don't understand this difference. He may
have been a perfect gentleman all day but she refuses
sex because she's still unhappy that he insulted her
mother two weeks ago.
225

One remarkable study found that the level of criticism
and contempt displayed by a couple towards each other
bears a direct relation to the number of infectious diseases
from which they would suffer over the next five years,
especially in the women. The higher the level of criticism,
the more prevalent and virulent the infections. The
reason for this is that heightened stress levels resulting
from arguments weakens the immune system, making the
body more susceptible to disease and less able to cope.

How Much Sex Are We Having?
A survey of couples conducted in Australia in 2000
showed the average frequency of sex for couples. Those
who participated in the survey were chosen at random
and it was conducted anonymously so it is likely respondents were telling the truth.
Age
20s
30s
40s
50s
60s

Frequency of Sex
148 times a year
110 times a year
78 times a year
61 times a year
61 times a year

Keep in mind that these are averages. Some 65-yearolds go at it six times a week and some 20-year-olds
have never had sex, but these are exceptions rather than
the rule. Interestingly, 81% of couples claimed to be
happy with their sex life which, assuming they were
telling the truth, means that plenty of negotiation must
have been taking place to make up for the excess of
men's sex drive. The percentage of couples who say
they have a satisfactory sex life in Western countries
usually runs at around 60%.
226

One American study found that all white men have
roughly the same amount of sex, Latin women have sex
more often than black or white women (who have about
the same amount), and black women are 50% more
likely than white women to reach orgasm every time
they have sex. Asian men were found to be having the
least amount of sex which is consistent with their lower
testoterone levels.

Sex on the Brain
American Demographics magazine reported the
findings of a group of researchers who surveyed over
10,000 adults in 1997 and discovered a link between
sex drive and intelligence. They found that the cleverer
you are, the less sex you have, or want to have.
Intellectuals with postgraduate qualifications had sex
52 times a year compared to an average of 61 times for
ordinary graduates, while school leavers averaged 59
times. Men with nine-to-five jobs had sex 48 times a
year, compared to 82 times for men working more
than 60 hours a week - increased testosterone
probably made the difference to both their work drive
and sex drive. Jazz enthusiasts have sex 34% more
than those who like pop, and classical enthusiasts have
the least sex.

A woman is most safe with a Chinese
man who loves classical music and
works part-time, but she should
beware of hardworking jazz pianists.
227

For men, testosterone comes in five to seven waves a
day, and is highest at sunrise - up to twice as high as at
any other time in the day - just before he sets out for
the day's hunting. On average, a man's testosterone is
30% lower in the evening when he's fire-gazing.
'I woke up at 6 o'clock one morning and my wife was
poking me in the back with a broom handle!', one man
told us after a lecture we had given. 'When I asked her
what she was doing, she said, "You try it for a change!"'

How Sex Improves Your Health
There is an overwhelming amount of evidence that sex
is great for your health. Having an amorous interlude an
average of three times a week burns up 35,000 kilojoules, which is equal to running 130 kilometres in a
year. Sex increases your testosterone levels which fortify
your bones and muscles and supply you with good cholesterol. Sex researcher Dr Beverley Whipple says,
'Endorphins, which are the body's natural pain killers,
are released during sex and are good for relieving
headache, whiplash and arthritis.'
The hormone DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone) is
also released just prior to orgasm, and improves
cognition, builds the immune system, inhibits tumour
growth and builds bones. In a woman, oxytocin, the
hormone that arouses the desire to be touched, is
released in large doses during sex and her oestrogen
levels also increase. Dr Harold Bloomfield, in his book
The Power of Five, showed how oestrogen is associated
with better bones and a better cardiovascular system in
women. The effect of all these hormones is to protect the
heart and extend life, so more sex equals longer life and
less stress. The list of benefits for having a vibrant sex
life is getting longer and longer!
228

Monogamy and Polygamy
Polygamy is where a man or woman has more than
one partner at one time. By now you may have reached
the conclusion that the human species is not monogamous by nature. Certainly, during most of our
evolution, more than 80% of all human societies were
polygamous societies, mainly for survival reasons.

Some men think monogamy is
what furniture is made out of.
Monogamy means that one male is permanently paired
with one female, which is the natural state for a number
of animal species, such as foxes, geese and eagles.
Monogamous male and female animals are generally the
same physical size and parenting responsibilities are
divided 50/50. In polygamous species, the males are
usually bigger, more colourful, more aggressive and have
minimal involvement in parenting. The males of polygamous animals mature sexually much later than the
females so that competitive conflicts are avoided between
the older males and younger, inexperienced males who
are less likely to survive a fight. Human males fit the
physical specifications of polygamous species; it's no
wonder men have a constant battle to stay monogamous.

Why Men Are Promiscuous
Where does marriage fit into the lifestyle of an animal
species that has a biologically promiscuous male?
Promiscuity is wired into a man's brain and is a legacy
of his evolutionary past. Throughout human history,
wars greatly diminished the numbers of men so it made
229

sense to add to the size of the tribe as often as possible.
The number of men returning from battle was usually
lower than at the start. This meant that there was
always a large number of widows, so creating a harem
for the returning males was an effective survival
strategy for the tribe.
Giving birth to boys was seen as a wonderful event
because additional males were always needed to defend
the community. Girls were a disappointment because
the tribe invariably had an excess of females. This is the
way it was for hundreds of thousands of years. In
addition, modern man is still equipped with a large
hypothalamus and enormous amounts of testosterone
to fulfil his ancient urge to procreate. The reality is that
men, like most primates and other mammals, are not
biologically inclined to complete monogamy.
The huge male-oriented sex industry offers pertinent
proof. Practically all pornography, erotic videos, prostitution and X-rated Internet images are directed at men,
showing that while most men can live in a monogamous relationship, their brain-wiring demands polygamous mental stimulation. It has to be understood,
however, that in discussing men's urge to be promiscuous, we are talking about biological inclinations. We
are not promoting promiscuous behaviour or providing
men with an excuse for infidelity. We live today in a
world that is completely different to that of our past,
and our own biology is often completely at odds with
our expectations and demands.

Human biology is
dangerously out of date.
The fact that something may be instinctive or natural
doesn't mean that it's good for us. The brain circuitry
230

of a moth gives it an instinctive attraction towards
bright lights and this allows the moth to navigate at
night using the stars and the moon. Unfortunately, the
modern moth is also living in a world that is dramatically different to the one in which it evolved. We now
have moth and mosquito zappers. By doing what is
natural and instinctive, the modern moth flies into the
zapper and is incinerated instantly. In understanding
their biological urges, modern men have a choice of
avoiding self-incineration as a result of doing what
comes naturally.
There's a small percentage of women who are as
promiscuous as men, but their motivation is usually
different to that of men. To be turned on sexually, the
brain circuitry of the nest-defending human female
responds to a range of criteria other than just the
promise of sex. Most women want a relationship or at
least the possibility of some emotional connection
before they feel the desire for sex. Most men don't
realise that once a woman feels an emotional bond has
been created, she will happily bonk his brains out for
the next three to six months. With the exception of the
rare percentage of nymphomaniacs, most women feel
the strongest urge for physical sex during ovulation
which can last several days or several hours.
If unrestrained, most men would fall into a bottomless pit of mindless fornication to guarantee survival of
the tribe. A survey conducted by the American Health
Institute showed that 82% of boys aged 16-19 said
they liked the idea of participating in an orgy with
strangers, while only two percent of girls felt the same.
The rest found the idea appalling.

A woman wants lots of sex with the man
she loves. A man wants lots of sex.
231

The Rooster Effect
A rooster is a very randy male bird which can copulate
with hens almost incessantly, more than 60 times in a
given mating. He cannot, however, mate with the same
hen more than five times in one day. By the sixth time,
he completely loses interest and can't 'get it up' but, if
he is presented with a new hen, he can mount her with
the same enthusiasm he did with the first. This is
known as the 'Rooster Effect'.
A bull will lose interest after copulating seven times
with the same cow but can be fired up again by the introduction of a new one. By the time he reaches the tenth
new cow, he is still giving an impressive performance.
A ram will not mount the same ewe more than five
times, but can continue to mount new ewes with
tremendous zeal. Even when the ram's former sexual
partners are disguised with perfume or bags over their
heads, the ram still cannot perform. You just can't fool
them. This is nature's way of ensuring that the male's
seed is spread as widely as possible in order to achieve
the highest number of conceptions and ensure the
survival of that species.

Men give their penis a name because
they don't want a stranger making
99% of their decisions for them.
For healthy young men, that number is also around
five. On a good day, he can have sex with the same
woman five times but will usually fail to give a sixth
encore. Introduce a new female however, and, like
roosters and bulls, his interest (along with parts of his
anatomy) can rapidly rise.
232

Male sex urge is so strong that Dr Patrick Carnes of
the Sexual Recovery Institute in Los Angeles estimates
that up to eight percent of men are addicted to sex,
compared to less than three percent of women.

Why Men Want Women to Dress Like
Tarts (but never in public)
A man's brain needs variety. Like most male mammals,
a man is pre-wired to seek out and mate with as many
healthy females as possible. This is why men love
novelty factors like sexy lingerie in a monogamous relationship. Unlike other mammals, men can fool themselves into believing they have a harem of different
women by dressing their partners in a range of sexy
clothing and lingerie. It is, in effect, his version of
putting a bag over her head to provide a variety of
different appearances. Most women know the effect
lingerie has on men although few understand why it is
so powerful.
Every Christmas the lingerie sections of department
stores are full of men sheepishly skulking around
trying to find a sexy gift for their partners. In January,
those women are standing in line at the refunds
counter in the same store. 'This is just not me,' they
say, 'he wants me to dress up like a hooker!' The
hooker is, however, a professional sex seller who has
researched market demands and is packaged to make a
sale. One American study has shown that women who
wear a variety of erotic lingerie have generally much
more faithful men than women who prefer white
cotton underwear. This is just one way that a man's
urge for variety is sometimes addressed in a monogamous relationship.
233

Why Men are Three-Minute Wonders
From a cold start to orgasm, a healthy man's average
time is around two-and-a-half minutes. For a healthy
woman, the same average is 13 minutes. For most
mammals, copulation is a fast affair because when they
are preoccupied with being joined together, they are
vulnerable to attack from predators. The quickie was
Nature's way of preserving the species.

'You're a lousy lover!' she said. 'How can
you tell that in two minutes?' he asked.
Depending on age, health and mood, many men can
have sex several times a day, sustaining an erection for
varying lengths of time. This is much more impressive
than the male African baboon which mates for between
merely ten and 20 seconds, and gives just four to eight
pelvic thrusts per mating, but pales into insignificance
against the wild rat, which has been recorded mating
up to 400 times in a ten-hour period. But first place in
the animal kingdom goes to the Shaw's mouse, which
holds the current sexual record of more than 100
matings per hour.
The Ball Game

'It takes a lot of balls to do that!' This is a common
expression that highlights how we unconsciously
recognise the relationship between testicle size and
assertiveness. Right across the animal world, testes
size - relative to the owner's overall body mass - is the
main factor in determining testosterone levels. Testes
size is not necessarily related to body size, however. A
234

gorilla, for example, weighs four times more than a
chimpanzee but a chimp's testicles are four times
heavier than a gorilla's. A sparrow's testicles are eight
times larger, relative to its body mass, than an eagle's
testicles, making the sparrow one of the randiest little
guys around. Now here's the point: testicle size determines the male's level of faithfulness or monogamy.
The African Bonobo chimpanzee has the largest
testicles of all primates and has sex incessantly with
every female in sight, but the mighty gorilla, with his
relatively small balls, would be lucky to have sex once
a year, even though he has his own harem. On the
testicle/body mass ratio, human males have balls that
are an average size for primates. This means that men
produce enough testosterone to encourage them to be
promiscuous, but little enough to be kept monogamous with strict rules enforced by women, religion or
the society in which they live.
In light of all this, it would make sense if political
leaders like Bill Clinton, John F. Kennedy, Winston
Churchill and Saddam Hussein had larger than average
balls, although we haven't actually got close enough to
check. It also follows that their sex drive would then be
correspondingly much higher than the average man's
and would need an outlet. The public puts big-balled,
high-testosterone individuals into positions of power
and then expects them to behave with as much sexual
restraint as a neutered cat. The reality is that high sex
drives get them into positions of power and can then,
ironically, see them turfed them out again.

Ray plays his wedding video backward. He
says it's so he can see himself walk out
of church, a free man.
235

There may soon be a solution to the philandering urges
of males. In 1999, Drs Larry Young and Thomas Insel of
Emory University in Atlanta, carried out studies on two
groups of rodents known as voles. They used two types
of vole: monogamous prairie voles and their polygamous
cousins, the montane vole, which share 99% of the same
genes. In Nature Magazine, Young and Insel described
how they took the gene (called the vasopressin receptor
gene) that plays a role in male behaviours, including
aggression, communication, sexual activity, and social
memory, from a monogamous vole and inserted it into
the polygamous vole. They discovered that the resulting
'new mice' formed close relationships with females and
behaved in many other monogamous ways.
There is only one guaranteed solution to the problem
of male infidelity - castration. Not only would a man
be monogamous, he wouldn't have to shave much, he
wouldn't go bald and he'd live longer. Studies of men in
mental institutions show that castrated men live to an
average age of 69, while men left intact with testosterone coursing through their bodies only live to 56.
The same principle applies to your cat.
We can also expect future generations of men to be
much less potent than modern men. Testicle size and
sperm production have been steadily decreasing for
generations. Evidence shows that our male ancestors
had much larger balls than modern men and, compared
to other primates, men produce significantly smaller
amounts of sperm per gram of tissue than their gorilla
or chimp cousins. The average sperm count of men is
now approximately half that of men in the 1940s so we
are now producing males who are less masculine than
their grandfathers.

236

Balls Have Brains Too
Dr Robin Baker from the School of Biological Sciences
at the University of Manchester conducted some remarkable research that showed a man's brain can unconsciously sense from a woman's behaviour when her
ovulation stage has arrived. His body then calculates and
releases the exact amount of sperm required at any given
moment to create the greatest chance of conception. For
example, if a couple is having sex every day, around the
woman's ovulation time his body may release 100
million sperm per session. If he hasn't seen her for three
days, his body will release 300 million sperm in a
session, and 500 million if he has not seen her for five
days - even if he has been having sex every day with
other women. Based on biological calculations by his
brain, his body releases just enough to do the job of conception and fight off any other competitive sperm that
may be present.

Men and Ogling
Men are stimulated through their eyes, women through
their ears. Men's brains are wired to look at female
shapes and this is why erotic images have so much
impact on them. Women, with their greater range of
sensory information receptors, want to hear sweet
words. A woman's sensitivity to hearing wonderful
compliments is so strong, many women even close their
eyes when their lover whispers sweet nothings.
Miss Universe contests command large audiences of
both men and women but television polls show there
are more male viewers than female. This is because men
are attracted to the female form and these contests are
an acceptable form of male ogling. By contrast, Mr
237

Universe contests appeal to almost no-one and are
rarely televised. This is because neither men or women
are interested in the passive male form because the
attractiveness of a man usually depends on his skills
and physical prowess.

Miss Universe competitions are watched
mainly by men, but Mr Universe
contests turn nobody on.
When a woman with a nice body walks by, a man,
lacking as he does good peripheral vision, turns his
head to look and goes into a trance-like state. His
blinking ceases and saliva fills his mouth, a reaction
described by women as 'drooling'. If a couple are
walking down the street and Miss Mini Skirt comes
swaying towards them on the other side of the street,
the woman's short-range peripheral vision allows her to
spot the woman before the man does. She'll make quick
comparisons between herself and the potential competitor, usually negative ones against herself. When
the man eventually spots her he receives a negative
reaction from his woman for ogling. A woman will
usually have two negative thoughts in this situation:
firstly, she mistakenly thinks that the man may prefer to
be with the other woman than with her and, secondly,
that she is not as physically attractive as the other
woman. Men are attracted visually to curves, leg
lengths, and shapes. Any woman with the right shape
and proportions will catch his attention.

Men prefer looks to brains because most
men can see better than they can think.
238

It doesn't mean that the man immediately wants to race
the other woman off to bed, but it is a reminder to him
that he is masculine and his evolutionary role is to look
for opportunities to increase the size of the tribe. After
all, he doesn't even know the other woman and could
not realistically be thinking about a long-term relationship with her. This same principle applies to a man
looking at the centrefold in a men's magazine. When he
looks at the naked woman, he doesn't wonder if she has
a nice personality, can cook or play the piano. He looks
at the shapes, curves and her physical equipment that's all. For him it's not much different to admiring a
leg of ham hanging in a shop window. We are not
making excuses for the rude, blatant ogling that some
men do; we're simply explaining that if a man gets
caught ogling, it doesn't mean he doesn't love his
partner - it's his biology at work. It's also interesting to
note that in a public place like the beach or swimming
pool, studies show that women ogle more than men.
Being equipped with better peripheral vision, women
rarely get caught.

What Men Need to Do
One of the best compliments a man can pay a woman is
not to 'ogle' inappropriately at another female, particularly in public, but to give his partner a simultaneous
compliment. For example, 'Sure, she's got great legs, but
I'll bet she doesn't have a great sense of humour ... she's
not in the same league as you, darling.' When this type
of complimentary approach is used in the presence of
other people, especially her friends, it pays big dividends
to the man with the courage to try it. Women need to
understand that a man is biologically compelled to look
at certain female shapes and curves, and that they
239

shouldn't feel threatened by it. An easy way for a
woman to take the pressure off a man is for her to notice
the other woman first and make the first comment. A
man also needs to understand that no woman appreciates inappropriate ogling.

What We Really Want, Long-Term
This chart is of a survey of more than 15,000 men and
women aged 17-60 which shows, in order of importance, what women are looking for in a long-term
sexual partner and what men think women want.

A
B
What Women Look For What Men Think
Women Look For
1. Personality
1. Personality
2. Humour
2. Good body
3. Sensitivity
3. Humour
4. Brains
4. Sensitivity
5. Good body
5. Good looks
This study shows that men have a reasonable understanding of what a woman wants in a man. Men placed
'Good body' high on list B but this was not high on a
woman's criteria list. And 15% of men believed that
having a large penis was important to a woman but
only two percent of women said that it mattered. Some
men are so convinced that penis size is critical that
penis extension equipment is now sold in sex shops and
magazines everywhere.
Now let's look at what men want in a long-term
sexual partner and what women think they want.

240

C
What Men Look For

D
What Women Think
Men Look For
1. Good looks
2. Good body
3. Breasts
4. Bum
5. Personality

1. Personality
2. Good looks
3. Brains
4. Humour
5. Good body

As you can see, women are considerably less aware of
men's criteria for a long-term partner. This is because
women base their assumptions on the behavioural traits
they see or hear in men - men gaping at women's bodies.
List A is both a short-term and long-term criteria list for
what a women wants in a man but for a man, things are
different. List D is what a man looks for when he first
meets a woman, but List C is what he really looks for in
the long-term.

Why Men Want 'Just One Thing'
Men want sex; women want love. This has been
known for thousands of years but why it is so, and
what to do about it, is rarely a topic of conversation.
It is a major source of complaint and argument
between men and women. Ask most women what they
want in a man and they will normally say they like a
man with broad shoulders, a small waist, and good
arms and legs - all the equipment needed to catch or
wrestle large animals - plus he must be caring, gentle
and sensitive to her needs, and a good conversationalist, which are all female attributes. Unfortunately for
most women, the combination of manly body
and female values is usually found only in gay or
effeminate men.
241

A man needs to be trained in the art of pleasuring a
woman as it does not come naturally to him. He's a
hunter - he's wired to solve problems, chase lunch and
fight enemies. At the end of the day, he just wants to
fire-gaze and give a few pelvic thrusts to keep his tribe
populated. For a woman to feel the desire for sex she
needs to feel loved, adored and significant. Now here's
the twist that most people never realise: A man needs to
have sex before he can get in tune with his feelings.
Unfortunately, a woman needs him to do that first
before she's turned on to sex. A man is wired to hunt.
His body is conditioned to do this regardless of
freezing, icy, hot or sweltering conditions. His skin is
desensitised so that he is not handicapped by injuries,
burns or chills. Historically, a man's world was full of
fighting and death - there was no place for sensitivity
to others' needs, communications or feelings. To spend
time communicating or expressing compassion meant a
man would lose concentration and leave the tribe open
to attack. A woman needs to understand that this is the
biology with which modern males are saddled, and
devise appropriate strategies to deal with it.
Women are taught by their mothers that men want
'just one thing' - sex - but this is not completely
accurate. Men want love, but they can only get it
through sex.
The sexual priorities of men and women are so
opposite that it makes no sense for either to chastise the
other. Neither one can help it; it's just the way they
were made. Besides, being opposites is one of the things
that attract. It's only in two gay male or female partners
that sexual desires are usually the same, which is why
homosexual men and women don't have the love/sex
argument as often as heterosexuals.

242

Why Sex Suddenly Stops
The person who first said that the way to a man's heart
is through his stomach was aiming too high. After a
man has had great sex, his softer, feminine side
emerges. He can hear birds singing, is struck by the
colours of the trees, can smell the flowers and is
touched by the words of a song. Before sex, he
probably only noticed the birds because of the mess
they made on his car. But a man needs to understand
this after-sex side is the one that a woman loves to see
and finds wonderfully seductive. If he can practise
feeling this way, he'll be able to turn the woman on
before having sex. At the same time, a woman needs to
understand the importance of giving great sex to a man
so she can glimpse this softer side and explain how
alluring she finds it.
At the beginning of a new relationship, sex is always
great and there is plenty of love. She gives him plenty of
sex and he gives her plenty of love, and one thing feeds
the other. After a few years, however, the man becomes
pre-occupied with lunch-chasing and the woman with
nest-defending, which is why sex and love seem to stop
simultaneously. Men and women are equally responsible for whether they have a good or bad sex life, but
each often blames the other when things don't go well.
Men need to understand that a woman needs attention,
praise, pampering and lots of time before she heats her
electric oven. Women have to remember that these are
the feelings men are more likely to express after a
session of great sex. A man should remember how he
felt after sex, and relive these feelings with a woman
when he wants sex next time. A woman should be
prepared to help him.
The key here is sex. For when sex is great, the whole
relationship dramatically improves.
243

How To Satisfy A Woman Every Time:
Caress, praise, pamper, relish, savour, massage, fix
things, empathise, serenade, compliment, support,
feed, soothe, tantalise, humour, placate, stimulate,
stroke, console, hug, ignore fat bits, cuddle, excite,
pacify, protect, phone, anticipate, smooch, nuzzle,
forgive, accessorise, entertain, charm, carry for,
oblige, fascinate, attend to, trust, defend, clothe,
brag about, sanctify, acknowledge, spoil, embrace,
die for, dream of, tease, gratify, squeeze, indulge,
idolise, worship.
How To Satisfy A Man Every Time:
Arrive naked.

What Men Want From Sex
For men this is simple: the release of built-up tension by
orgasm. After sex a man weighs less (some say it's
because his brain is empty) because he has lost a part of
his body and he needs rest to recover. This is why men
often fall asleep after sex. A woman may become angry
about this and feel that he is selfish or doesn't care
about her needs.
Men also use sex to express physically what they can't
express emotionally. If a man has a problem such as
how he'll find a new job, pay the overdraft or resolve a
dispute, he's likely to use sex to relieve the intensity of
his emotions. Women usually don't understand this and
become resentful at being 'used', missing the point that
the man had a problem he couldn't deal with.

244

Men fantasise about having sex with
two women. Women fantasise about
it too - so that they'll have someone
to talk to when he falls asleep.
There are few problems a man can have that great sex
won't fix. Tests show that a man who has a pent-up
need for sex has difficulty hearing, thinking, driving or
operating heavy machinery. He also suffers a form of
time-distortion where 3 minutes feels like 15. If a
woman wants an intelligent decision from a man she's
better off discussing it after sex, when his brain is clear.

What Women Want From Sex
For a man to feel fulfilled through sex, he needs the
release of tension. A woman has the opposite need: she
needs to feel the build-up of tension over a longer period
of time with her prerequisite of lots of attention and talk.
He wants to empty; she wants to fill up. Understanding
this difference makes men more caring lovers. Most
women need at least 30 minutes of foreplay before they
are ready for sex. Men need at least 30 seconds, and
most consider driving back to her place as foreplay.

Adam came first - but men usually do.
After sex, a woman is high on hormones and is ready
to take on the world. She wants to touch, cuddle and
talk. A man, however, if he hasn't already fallen asleep,
sometimes withdraws by getting up and 'doing
something' such as changing a lightbulb or making
245

coffee. This is because a man needs to feel in control of
himself at all times and, during orgasm, he temporarily
loses control. Getting up and doing something allows
him to regain that command.

Why Men Don't Talk During Sex
Most men can only do one thing at a time. When a man
has an erection he finds it difficult to speak, hear or
drive, and this is why men rarely talk much during sex.
Sometimes a woman needs to listen to his breathing to
monitor his progress. Men love to hear women talk
'dirty' about what she can and will do for him - but
only before sex, not during. A man may experience a
loss of direction (and erection) when a woman talks to
him during sex. During sex, a man uses his right brain,
and brain scans show that he's so intent on what he is
doing, he's virtually deaf.

For a man to talk during sex, he needs
to switch to his left brain. A woman
can multi-track sex and speech.
For a woman, talk is a crucial part of foreplay because
words are all-important to her. If during sex, a man
stops talking, a woman may think he isn't interested in
her. A man needs to practise lots of love talk during
foreplay to fulfil a woman's needs. A woman, however,
needs to stop talking during sex, and just use vocal
sounds to keep a man interested - lots of 'oooh's' and
'aaahs' give a man the positive feedback he needs to
achieve fulfilment. If a woman talks during sex, a man
feels obliged to respond and the moment can be lost.
246

A woman's brain is not pre-wired to respond to the
chemicals of sex drive as dramatically as a man's brain.
During sex, a woman is acutely aware of outside
sounds or environmental changes, but a man will be
totally focused and undistracted. This is a woman's
ancient nest-defending biology in action - she is monitoring sounds to make sure nothing is sneaking up to
steal her offspring. As many men have found, trying to
entice a woman to make love in an open area, or in a
room with thin walls or unlocked doors can be a great
way to start an argument. It also throws light on why
this inbuilt fear is most women's secret fantasy - having
sex in a public place.

The Orgasm Objective
'She just uses me whenever she wants and then forgets
about me. I hate being a sex object!' These words have
never been uttered by any man. A man's criterion for
fulfilment is orgasm and he mistakenly assumes that it
is also a woman's. 'How could she possibly feel fulfilled
without orgasm?' he wonders. A man can't imagine
such a situation for himself and so he uses a woman's
orgasm as the measure of his own success as a lover.
This expectation puts enormous pressure on women to
perform and actually reduces their chances of orgasm.
A woman needs the feelings of closeness and warmth
and the build-up of tension for great sex, and she
usually sees orgasm as an extra - not the objective. A
man always needs orgasm, but a woman does not. Men
see women as their sexual mirrors and spend ages
pumping and thrusting away, thinking that's what she
really wants. Look at the next chart and study the
peaks and troughs of a woman's sex drive throughout
the year. The peaks are when she is most likely to want
247

an orgasm - around the time of ovulation - and the
troughs are where she needs lots of cuddles and nonsexual touching.You will notice that a woman's desire
for sex is highest in the autumn. This means more
babies will be born in the summer giving them a greater
chance of survival due to warmer temperatures and
more plentiful food.

Male and female sex drives

A common fantasy for most men is a sensuous, unknown
woman coming on to him and finding him irresistible.
He satisfies her every need - her every need. A man's
measurement of his prowess as a lover is directly related
to her level of satisfaction and so he constantly monitors
her reactions to see how well he's doing.

Men don't fake orgasm - no man wants to
pull a face like that on purpose.
Most men do not have the ability to sense a woman's
intimate feelings and emotions during sex which is
another reason why her orgasm is so important to him.
It proves to him he must have done a good job, he
248

achieved a result. Most men never understand that
compulsory orgasm is a man's criterion for success; it's
not necessarily a woman's. For a woman, an orgasm is
an added bonus, not a measurement.

What Turns Us On?
Here is a list of the top turn-ons for both sexes,
showing how men and women do not understand each
others' sexual needs. The list of preferences is a direct
reflection of the brainset of men and women. Men are
visual and want sex. Women are auditory and feeling
and want touch and romance.

Women's Turn-Ons
1. Romance
2. Commitment
3. Communication
4. Intimacy
5. Non-sexual touching

Men's Turn-Ons
1. Pornography
2. Female nudity
3. Sexual variety
4. Lingerie
5. Her availability

A man's biological job is to find as many healthy
females as possible and help them conceive. A woman's
biological role is to bear children and find a partner
who will stick around long enough to raise them. For
both, these ancient forces are driving them on, despite
living in an age in which procreation for survival is no
longer relevant. This is why commitment is such a turnon for women, with romance containing the subtle
promise of a man's readiness to help raise the offspring.
This is why women need monogamy, and we'll discuss
this in the next chapter.
For a woman to criticise a man's need for visual stimulation is like a man criticising a woman for wanting to
talk or go out to dinner. The answer is to have both.
249

How Men Get a Raw Deal
The things that turn men on are often described as
dirty, disgusting, crude or perverted, particularly by
women. Overall, women are not aroused by the items
on a man's turn-on list and men show little reaction to
the items on a woman's list.
The public generally glorifies women's turn-ons in
movies, books and advertisements, and condemns
men's as pornographic or crude. From a biological
standpoint, however, each needs these factors to feel
aroused. Public criticism of men's turn-ons is what
drives men to hide their Playboy magazines and deny
they have secret fantasies. Many men's needs remain
unfulfilled and many feel guilt or resentment. When a
man and a woman understand the history and
evolution of their desires, it makes it easier to understand and accept, without anger, resentment or guilt.
No person should do anything they do not feel comfortable with but having an open discussion about
each others' needs can help to enhance a more loving
relationship. A man also needs to understand that it
takes less effort for him to organise a romantic dinner
or weekend away than it is for a woman to dress in
suspenders and swing from a chandelier.

The Aphrodisiac Myth
Of the hundreds of popularised aphrodisiacs around,
none have been scientifically shown to work. They
work on what is called the placebo effect - if you
think it will work, it probably will. Some so called aphrodisiacs can even help inhibit or
constrain sexual desire, particularly when they irritate
the kidneys, and cause itching and rashes. The only
250

aphrodisiacs guaranteed to work are those on the list
of what turns us on.

Men and Their Pornography
Men love pornography and women don't. For men, it
appeals to their biological urges by showing clear
images of shapes, lust and sex, but many women see it
as showing the domination of women by insensitive
men. There has been no evidence to prove a connection
between pornography and sex crimes. It can, however,
be psychologically damaging to men and women
simply because it shows men hung like donkeys who
can keep thrusting mindlessly for hours. This can significantly affect the expectations a man has about his
own performance.

What's the difference
between erotic and kinky?
Erotic is when you use a feather.
Kinky is when you use the
whole chicken.
Pornography also implies that women have the same
visual and physical arousal criteria as men, and that a
woman's sex drive is as strong as or higher than a
man's. It can have a detrimental impact on women too.
Showing them being treated as sex objects and having a
totally unrealistic hunger for physical sex can damage a
woman's self-esteem. But while surveys of 18-23 year
olds show that 50% of men feel that their sex life is not
251

as good as that portrayed in movies, TV and
magazines, 62% of women feel their sex life is as good
as or better than media depictions. It appears that men
are more affected by their performance expectations
than women.

Are There Female Sex Maniacs?
If aliens from outer space landed on Earth and surveyed
a selection of our men's and women's magazines, books
and movies, they would quickly reach the conclusion
that human females are a highly sexed lot who are all
multi-orgasmic and just can't get enough. If the aliens
then read or watched the kind of pornography we
routinely produce, they would be convinced that women
have an insatiable sexual appetite and will bonk almost
any man under nearly any circumstances. This is the
image that modern women have been expected to live
up to by the media. In reality, the voracious female sex
maniac is a figment of most men's imaginations and
accounts for less than one percent of all women. A
modern woman now has difficulty believing a man who
tells her that he likes the way she looks when she's
naked. This fantasy image usually only affects modern
men and women because their parents and grandparents
were never exposed to this idea of a woman possessing
a man's sex drive. Many women, however, feel
abnormal or even frigid because they don't measure up
to these media images. Men have been coaxed into
believing that women now have high sex drives and this
makes men feel angry or frustrated when women don't
initiate sex often enough. With magazine article
headlines like, 'Become multi-orgasmic in five days!',
'How to bed a European Lover', 'Tantric Sex - keep it
going for hours', 'I had 300 lovers in three years!' and
252

'How to keep him hard all night', it's no wonder that
men and women are befuddled into thinking that
women have only sex on their minds.

The women's movement freed
modern women's attitudes to
their sexuality, but it did not
increase their basic urge to have sex.
Women's sex drive has probably remained the same for
thousands of years and all that has changed is that it is
now open for discussion. The sex drive of a modern
woman is probably no different to that of her mother
or grandmother, but the older generation of women
suppressed it and certainly didn't discuss it. Before the
Pill arrived, sexual frustration must have been a good
deal higher. But certainly not as high as the media today
would have us believe.

Lights Off or On?
As we now know, men are visual when it comes to sex.
They want to see shapes, curves, nudes, pornography.
Kinsey found that 76% of men said they wanted sex
with the lights on, compared to only 36% of women.
Overall, women are not stimulated by nudity unless it
is a nude couple in a romantic or suggestive scene.
When a man sees a woman naked he becomes highly
stimulated and aroused. When a woman sees a man
naked, she usually bursts into laughter.
Women love words and feelings. They prefer sex with
the lights down or off or with their eyes closed, as this
253

perfectly suits a woman's finely tuned sensory
equipment. Gentle stroking, sensual touches and whispering sweet nothings will turn on most women. Nude
male centrefolds come and go as women's magazines try
to persuade us that women's attitudes to nudity are now
the same as men's. These centrefolds vanish just as
quickly as they appear, but it has been shown that they
increase overall readership by gay men.

Most women prefer sex with the
lights out - they can't bear to see
a man enjoying himself.
Men like sex with the lights on so they can get the woman's name right.
All attempts at selling porn to women have failed
although, during the late 1990s, there was an increase
in the sale of semi -naked male pin-up calendars, which
ended up outstripping the sales of female nude
calendars. The buyers of nude male calenders have been
shown to fall into three categories - teenage girls who
want pictures of their favourite movie or rock star,
women who want it as a humorous joke for one of their
friends, and gay men.

254

CHAPTER 10

MARRIAGE, LOVE
AND ROMANCE

'...I want openness, honesty, and a monogamous
relationship. I'm not into men who want to play games!'

255

air-bonding, that is, one man-one woman, has
P been
the general living concept for humans for a
long time. It was usually an arrangement where a male
kept his favourite female and, if he could afford to feed
them, several other females, plus a range of indiscriminate sexual encounters on the side.
Modern marriage was an invention of JudeoChristian ideals and was a subtle form of recruitment. By
convincing two adults to commit to a set of rules
demanding obedience to a God, the offspring of the
marriage would automatically be born into the parents'
religion. Whenever any human activity, however, is surrounded by elaborate rituals and public declarations, it is
usually contrary to our biology and is intended to make
people do something they would not naturally do.
Peach-faced birds do not need an elaborate ceremony for
them to 'marry' - it is their natural biological state. To
insist that a polygamous animal like a ram agrees to a
contract of marriage to a single ewe is equally ridiculous.
This is not to say that marriage has no place in modern
society. We, the authors, are married, but it's important
to understand its history and its relation to our biology.

Marriage has its good side. It teaches you
loyalty, forbearance, tolerance, selfrestraint, and other valuable qualities you
wouldn't need if you stayed single.

256

So, what's the advantage of marriage to men? In basic
evolutionary terms, nothing. A man is like a rooster
whose urge is to spread his genetic seed as widely as
possible and as often as he can. Yet the majority of men
still marry, and divorced men remarry or live in pseudomarried states. This shows society's remarkable ability
to restrain biologically promiscuous men.

Sex is the price women pay for marriage.
Marriage is the price men pay for sex.
When asked, 'What can marriage offer you?', most men
will mumble something about having a warm safe
refuge, having their food cooked for them, their clothes
ironed. At base, they want a cross between their mother
and a personal servant. Psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud
said such men probably have a mother/son relationship
with their wives. Only 22% of men mention their
female partner as their best friend. The best friend of
most men is usually another man, because they understand each other's thought processes. When asked,
'Who's your best friend?' 86% of women said it was
another woman, in other words, someone with similar
brain-wiring.
When men walk down the aisle, many see it as the
beginning of an endless supply of sex-on-demand, but
this expectation, never discussed before marriage, is not
how women see it. Surveys do reveal, however, that
married men have more sex than single men, with
married men aged between 25 and 50 averaging three
times a week, whereas only half the single men have
that much. The single man's average is less than once a
week. In 1999 in Australia 20% of single men did not
have sex in the year of the survey and three per cent of
married men also missed out. As we've already
257

discussed, sex is marvellous for overall health.
Unmarried or widowed men also have a higher
premature death rate than married men.
Why Women Need Monogamy
Even though marriage in Western societies has become
a toothless tiger from a legal standpoint, it is still the
ambition of most women and 91% of people still get
married. This is because, for a woman, marriage is a
declaration to the world that a man regards her as
'special' and intends to have a monogamous relationship with her. This feeling of being 'special' has a
dramatic effect on the chemical action in a woman's
brain which is evidenced by research showing that a
woman's orgasm rate is four to five times higher in a
marital bed and two to three times higher in a monogamous relationship.
There is a feeling among older people that the young
think marriage is an outdated institution. A survey in
1998 of 2,344 male and female college students aged 1823, equally divided between the sexes, found this not
to be the case. When asked about commitment, 84%
of women, compared to 70% of men, said they would
marry some day. Only 5% of men and 2% of women
felt marriage was obsolete.
Friendships were found to be more important than
sexual relationships for 92% of both sexes. When it
came to the notion of being married to one person for
the rest of their lives, 86% of women liked the idea,
compared to 75% of men. Only 35% of couples felt
that today's relationships are better than those of their
parents' generation. Fidelity was a high priority on
women's lists, with 44% of the under-30s saying they
would end a relationship if a man was unfaithful, a
258

figure that dropped to 32% among women in their 30s.
Of women in their 40s, 28% said they'd end it, while
only 11% of women in their 60s felt the same. This all
shows that the younger a woman is, the tougher she
will be on a straying man, and the more important
fidelity and monogamy are to her value system.
This is a difference that most men never understand.
The majority believe having the odd fling will not affect
their relationship because men have little problem separating sex from love in the brain. For women,
however, sex and love are intertwined. A sexual liaison
with another woman can be seen as the ultimate
betrayal, and good reason for finishing a relationship.
If marriage fails as often as it does, why do so many
of us keep doing it? Why not live on our own, or with
our families or friends, and have lovers when the mood
takes us? There are two answers. Firstly, happy stable
marriages continue to be the most reliable way to bring
up happy, healthy children. Secondly, marriage can
have an enormous soothing effect. In a world where life
is lived at breakneck speed, marriage at its best can
function like a port in a storm, a place to rest and recuperate from the stresses which face us every day - a
place to relax and be, both literally and psychologically,
'at home'.

Why Men Avoid Commitment
A man who is married or in a long-term relationship is
always secretly worried that single men are having
more sex and more fun. He imagines wild singles
parties, adventurous, commitment-free coupling and
Jacuzzis full of naked supermodels. He fears opportunity
is passing right by him, and he's missing out completely.
It doesn't matter that, when he was single, such
259

opportunities never presented themselves anyway. He
forgets about those evenings sitting alone eating cold
baked beans out of a can, the humiliating rebuffs from
women in front of friends at parties and the long
periods without sex. He just can't help worrying that
commitment equals missing out.

Men want to wait for the perfect partner,
but all they usually get is older.
Where is Love in the Brain?
In June 2000, Professor Semin Zeki and Andrew
Bartela at University College, London scanned the
brains of 11 female and 6 male volunteers who all
described themselves as 'madly in love' and had fallen
in love within the past 6 to 12 months. They were
shown alternating pictures of their lover plus pictures
of friends of the same sex. The scientists found that
seeing a lover activated 4 specific regions of the brain.
Two areas lay in the cerebral cortex, the more advanced
part of the brain. These were the medial insula, which
is thought to be responsible for 'gut feelings' and part
of the interior (cingulate), which is known to respond
to euphoria-inducing drugs. Another two in the deeper
and more primitive basal (ganglin) region of the brain
were involved in finding experiences rewarding and
play a role in addiction.
This research explains why when we are in love
we are often in an euphoric, drug-like state and don't
get depressed.
American anthropologist Dr Helen Fisher of Rutgers
University, New Jersey, has also been carrying out pioneering work using brain scans in order to locate the
260

position of love in the brain. While her research is still
in the preliminary stages, she has located three types of
emotion in the brain: lust, infatuation and attachment.
Each emotion has its own specific brain chemistry
which lights up the brain when its owner is attracted to
someone. In biological terms, these three components
of love have evolved to serve the vital function of
ensuring reproduction. Once conception has occurred,
the system deactivates itself and the love process stops.
The first stage, lust, is the physical and nonverbal attraction previously discussed. Fisher says,
'Infatuation is a stage where a person keeps popping
into your brain and you can't get them out. Your brain
focuses on the positive qualities of the sweetheart and
ignores their bad habits.'
Infatuation is the brain's attempt to form a bond with
a potential partner and it is an emotion so powerful
that it can cause incredible euphoria. If someone is
rejected it can also cause extraordinary despair and can
lead to obsession. In extreme cases, it can even end in
murder. At the infatuation stage, several powerful brain
chemicals are released which cause feelings of elation.
Dopamine gives the feeling of well-being, phenylethylamine increases excitement levels, serotonin creates a
sense of emotional stability and norepinephrine induces
the feeling that you can achieve anything. A sex addict
is someone who becomes addicted to the hormonal
cocktail of the infatuation stage and wants to stay permanently high. But infatuation is a temporary feeling
lasting, on average, from 3 to 12 months, when most
people mistakenly define it as love. It is, in fact, a biological trick by nature to guarantee that a man and a
woman are thrown together long enough to procreate.
The danger of this stage is that lovers believe their sex
drives are perfectly matched, but only because they are
going at it like rabbits. Their real sex drive differences
261

reveal themselves only after the infatuation stage ends
or the attachment stage begins.

Infatuation is nature's biological
trick to guarantee that a man
and a woman are thrown
together long enough to procreate.
When reality finally takes over from infatuation, either
one or both of the partners will reject the other, or the
third stage, attachment, will kick in, with its focus on
building a co-operative bond that will last long enough
to raise children. With more research and the rapid
technological advancement in brain scanners, Fisher
expects soon to have a formula for understanding the
brain locations for love and emotions in both men and
women. Understanding these three stages can make it
easier to deal with the infatuation stage and to be
prepared for its possible downside.

Love: Why Men Fall In and Women Fall Out
Love is said to be confusing, and this is especially true for
men. Men are fuelled to the eyeballs with testosterone
which leads them easily into the lust phase of falling in
love. During the infatuation stage, men are so fired up on
testosterone that most can't tell which way is up, down
or sideways. Reality, when it hits home, can hit especially
hard. The woman who was so exciting at midnight last
night might not seem anywhere near as attractive next
morning when the sun rises - and not all that intelligent
either. But because the centres for emotion and
262

reason are better connected in a woman's brain - and
she's not out of control on testosterone - she finds it
easier to evaluate whether a man is potentially the right
partner for her. This is why most relationships are ended
by women and why so many men are confused about
what happened. Women are gentle in separation even
when they are dumping a man. In a goodbye letter to
him, some women will finish by drawing a happy face or
saying they will always love him.

Why Men Can't Say'I Love You'
Saying 'I love you' is never a problem for a woman. A
woman's brain-wiring makes her world full of feelings,
emotions, communication and words. A woman knows
that when she feels warm, wanted and adored and is in
the attachment stage, she's probably in love, but a man
is not exactly sure what love is and he's likely to
confuse lust and infatuation with love. All he knows is
that he can't keep his hands off her so ... maybe that's
love? His brain is blinded by testosterone, he has a
constant erection and he can't think straight. It's often
not until years after a relationship begins that a man
recognises he was in love, but he does it in retrospect.
Women recognise when love does not exist and that's
why most relationships are ended by women.

Women recognise when love doesn't
exist. That's why they're much more
proactive in finishing relationships.
Many men are commitment-phobes. They are scared
that saying the 'L' word commits them for the rest of
263

their lives and spells the end of any chance of naked
supermodels in Jacuzzis. When a man eventually crosses
the line by saying it, he then wants to tell everyone,
everywhere. Most men, however, do not notice the
increase in a woman's orgasm rate after he has said the
'L' word.

How Men Can Separate Love from Sex
The happily married woman who has an affair is rare,
but the happily married male wanderer is common.
More than 90% of affairs are initiated by men but
more than 80% are ended by women. This is because
when a woman begins to realise that the affair has no
lasting emotional promise and will only be physical, she
wants out. A man's brain, with its ability to separate
love from sex and deal with each item separately
because of its compartmentalisation, lets him see just
one thing at a time. He's therefore often happy with just
a good physical relationship - that's taken all his
attention. It is still unclear exactly where love is
situated in the brain, but research indicates that a
woman's brain has a network of connections between
her love centre and her sex centre (the hypothalamus),
and the love centre needs to be activated before her sex
centre can be switched on. Men do not appear to have
these connections and so they can deal with sex or love
separately. For a man, sex is sex and love is love, and
sometimes they happen together.
The first question a woman will ask a man who has
been caught having an affair is, 'Do you love the
woman?' The man who answers, 'No, it was only
physical, it didn't mean anything,' is likely to be telling
the truth, because he can separate sex from love. A
woman's brain is not wired to understand or accept this
264

answer and this is why many women find it difficult to
believe a man who says it meant nothing, because, for
her, sex equals love. In a woman's mind, it is not the
physical act of sex with the other woman that affects her
as much as the violation of the emotional contract and
trust she had in him. If a woman has an affair and says it
didn't mean anything, she's probably lying. For a woman
to cross the line to having sex, she would have already
had to establish an emotional bond with the new man.

For women, love and sex are intertwined.
One equals the other.
When Women Make Love, Men Have Sex
An old adage holds that making love is what a woman
does while a man is bonking her. What it actually is,
however, often sparks arguments between lovers everywhere. A man will call sex 'sex' but a woman is likely
to react negatively to the word as it is not, by her definition, the way it is. A woman 'makes love', meaning
that she needs to feel loved and have loving feelings
before she wants to have sex. To most women the act
of 'sex' is generally seen as a loveless, gratuitous act
because the wiring of a female brain does not identify
with this definition.
When a man says 'sex', sometimes he means just
physical sex, but this doesn't mean he doesn't love his
woman. When a man wants to 'make love', he is still
likely to call it 'sex'. This can have negative effects on a
woman, but to use the expression 'make love' can make
many men feel that they are being phoney or conning
her, because sometimes he just wants sex. When a
woman claims a man is 'sleeping' with someone, you
265

can bet he is not sleeping. 'How could you sleep with
her?' women ask. 'You don't even like her!'
Emotionally, men and women do seem to inhabit
different planets, but it's not necessarily down to a male
lack of moral fibre. The bit of the brain that handles
our emotions - the limbic system - has two parts.
There is the old part (temporal limbic) which is the bit
that deals with sex and violence, and a newer part
(gyrus cinguli) which is more linked into thinking and
imagining. Male brains are more active in the old part
and are more tuned for action and women's brains are
active in the newer part for 'symbolic emotional
responses.' When men and women understand each
other's perspective and agree not to judge each other's
definition, this obstacle ceases to be a stumbling block
in the relationship.

Why Great Partners Look Attractive
Studies at the Kinsey Institute reveal that during lovemaking a man's perception of his woman is related to
the depth of his intimate feelings for her. This means
that he rates her higher on the physical attractiveness
scale if he's madly in love with her, even if others feel
that, when she's naked, she'd look more like the
Michelin Man. He rates her lower in attractiveness if he
does not particularly care for her, even though she may
be physically stunning. When a man is turned on by a
woman, the size of her thighs becomes irrelevant. In
fact, they're perfect. This demonstrates that while a
woman's physical attractiveness rates highly in initial
meetings for men, a warm nurturing partnership
accounts for a significant part of her attractiveness in
the long-term and this is confirmed by the surveys of
'what we look for' in Chapter 9. This is not the case
266

with a man's attractiveness to a woman, however. This
has been illustrated by some interesting studies carried
out in singles bars. Researchers found that the later the
hour, the more attractive the available women looked
to the unattached men. A woman who was rated by the
men as a five out of ten at 7pm, was rated seven by
10.30pm, and eight-and-a-half at midnight, with
alcohol levels enhancing the scores. With women,
however, a man who rated a five at 7pm was still given
the same mark at midnight.

For a woman, a man who rates a
five at 7pm still rates the same
score at midnight, regardless of
how much she's had to drink.
Alcohol did not increase his attractiveness rating and,
in some cases, it even decreased his rating. Women still
evaluate a man's viability as a partner by his personal
characteristics above his physical appearance, regardless of the hour or the amount of alcohol consumed.
Men increase a woman's attractiveness rating relative
to the odds that she will let him carry out his role as a
professional sperm donor.

Do Opposites Attract?
Groundbreaking studies by scientists in 1962 found we
are drawn to people with similar values, interests,
attitudes and perceptions, and these are people with
whom we instantly 'click'. Subsequent studies showed
that lovers have a greater chance of a long-term rela267

tionship under these conditions. Too many similarities,
however, can also become boring. We need just enough
difference to make it interesting and to complement our
own personalities, yet not so much that it will interfere
with our lifestyles. A quiet man, for example, might be
attracted to an outgoing woman and a woman who is
a worrier may zero in on a relaxed, laid-back partner.

Physical Opposites Attract
Look at any study or survey of what attracts us physically to the opposite sex and you'll find that we prefer
opposite physical features to our own. Men prefer
women with softness and curves where men have
firmness and flat areas. Men prefer women with wide
hips, narrow waists, long legs and round chests - all
attributes they will never possess. He prefers smaller
chins and noses and a flat stomach, too, as he will
normally have the opposite.
Women also prefer the opposite in men, including
wider shoulders, narrower hips, thicker legs and arms,
stronger chins and fuller noses. Yet there are some interesting exceptions. Some studies, for example, have found
that men who don't drink alcohol prefer women with
small breasts, women with large breasts prefer men with
small noses, and men with large noses usually hang out
with flat -chested women. Extroverted men prefer
women with very large breasts.

The Hips-to-Waist Ratio is the Key
If you look at men's tastes over the centuries you will
see that they have gone ga-ga over everything from
large, fleshy 16th Century models to the pencil-skinny
268

supermodels who look more like asparagus spears. The
one thing that has remained constant, however, is a
woman's hip-to-waist ratio which never fails to grab a
man's attention. Women with a hip-to-waist measurement of 70% waist size relative to hips have been
shown to have a higher fertility rate and better health
than other women. Dr Devendra Singh of Cambridge
University surveyed men of many nationalities to find
that men had unconsciously learned to read this information somewhere in their past, and now have it prewired into their brains.
The good news for women is that if your waist measurement is between 67% to 80% that of your hips,
you'll get men's attention even if you are 5 to 10 kilos
overweight as the curves are the essential criteria. As a
bonus, women with these ratios are also perceived by
men as humorous, sexy, healthy and intelligent. Women
with a higher ratio, that is, thick waist, are seen as
caring and faithful. Women who are too thin are
perceived as ambitious and aggressive.

Women everywhere prefer a
small, tight rear on a man,
although few women know why.
Women still go for the V-shaped man with broad
shoulders, narrow waist and strong arms, which were
all the original prerequisites of the successful lunchchaser. A strong chin, nose and brow also appeal
because they give a man a greater chance of surviving
a heavy blow to the front of the head. Women everywhere also prefer a small tight rear on a man, although
few will have any idea why they find that so attractive.
We are the only primate that has a protruding rear and
269

its purpose is two-fold. Firstly, it helps us stand
upright. And secondly, it ensures that a man can give a
strong forward thrust during sex to increase the chance
of fertilisation.

Men and Romance
It's not that men don't want to romance women, it's
just that they don't understand its importance to
women. The books we buy are a clear indicator of the
things that interest us. Women spend millions every
year on romantic novels. Women's magazines concentrate on love, romance, other people's affairs or how to
exercise, eat and dress better to have even more
romance. One Australian study showed that women
who read romance novels have sex twice as often as
those who don't. Conversely, men spend millions on
books and magazines teaching technical know-how on
a range of spatially-related subjects, from computers
and mechanical apparatus to lunch-chasing activities
like fishing, hunting and football.
It's no wonder when it comes to romance that most men
generally don't know what to do. This is understandable
as a modern man has never had a role model. His father
didn't know what to do either, as it was never an issue for
him. A woman at one of our conferences recently said that
she had asked her husband to show her more affection so he washed and polished her car. This demonstrates how
men see 'doing things' as a way of showing they care. The
same husband bought her a car jack for her birthday and
got her front row seats at a wrestling match for their tenth
wedding anniversary.

270

Never forget that a woman is a
romantic. She enjoys wine, flowers,
and chocolate. Let her know that you,
too, remember these things . . . b y
speaking of them occasionally.
Woody Allen

While European men have a somewhat over-exaggerated
reputation for romance, the vast majority of men, in
every corner of the world, haven't got a clue. Previous
generations of men were too busy making ends meet to
have to worry about such finesse. Besides, men's brains
are wired for the technical and not the aesthetic. It's not
that a man won't try, he just doesn't understand the significance of opening a car door, sending flowers,
dancing, cooking for a woman, or changing a toilet roll.
A woman enters a new relationship looking for romance
and love. Sex comes as a consequence. Men frequently
enter a relationship through sex and then look to see if
there could be the possibility of a relationship.

Some Surefire Romance Tips for Men
Women don't have a problem when it comes to love and
romance, but most men are in the dark about it so they
simply make sure they're ready for love any time, any
place. A man's romantic skills (or lack thereof) play a
significant part in whether a woman will feel like having
sex with him, so here are six tried and tested things that
work as well for men today as they did 5,000 years ago.
271

How do you know if a man is
ready for sex? He's breathing.
1. Set the environment. When you consider a woman's
sensitivity to her surroundings and the high receptiv
ity of her senses to outside stimuli, it makes sense
that a man pays attention to the environment.
Women's oestrogen hormones make her sensitive to
the right lighting - dimly-lit rooms make pupils
dilate, so people look attractive to each other and
skin blemishes and wrinkles are less noticeable. A
woman's superior hearing means the right music is
important, and a clean, secure cave is better than one
that can be invaded by children or other people at
any moment. Women's insistence on sex in private
explains why most women's private fantasy is of
having sex in public, while a man's private fantasy is
sex with a stranger.
2. Feed her. Having evolved as a lunch-chaser, you'd
think it would occur to a man that providing a
woman with food stirs up primal female feelings.
This is why taking a woman to dinner is a significant
event for her even when she's not hungry because the
provision of food shows his attention to her wellbeing and survival. Cooking a meal for a woman has
an even deeper intrinsic meaning as it brings out
primitive feelings in both a man and a woman.
3. Light a fire. Collecting wood and lighting a fire to
give warmth and protection has been done by men
for women for hundreds of thousands of years, and
appeals to most women's romantic side. Even if it's a
gas fire that she can light easily herself, he needs to
light it if he wants to set a romantic atmosphere. The
pay-off comes from the act of providing for her
needs, not from the fire itself.
272

4. Bring flowers. Most men do not understand the
power of a bunch of fresh flowers. Men think, 'Why
spend so much money on something that will be dead
and thrown out in a few days?' It makes sense to a
man's logical mind to give a woman a pot plant
because, with constant care and attention, it will
survive - in fact, you could even make a profit on it!
However, a woman doesn't see it that way - she
wants a fresh bunch of flowers. After a few days the
flowers die and are thrown out, but this presents an
opportunity for him to buy another bunch and once
again bring out her romantic side by providing for
her needs.
5. Go dancing. It's not that men don't want to dance,
it's just that many of them don't have the location in
the right brain required to feel rhythm. Go to any
aerobics class and watch the male participants (if any
turn up) trying to keep time. When a man takes
dancing lessons for basic rock 'n' roll and waltz, he
will be the hit of the party with all women. Dancing
has been described as a vertical act of horizontal
desire and that's its history - it's a ritual that evolved
to allow close male/female body contact as a lead-up
to courtship, just as it did with other animals.
6. Buy chocolates and champagne. This combination
has long been associated with romance, although few
people know why. Champagne contains a chemical
not found in other alcoholic beverages which
increases testosterone levels. Chocolate contains
phenylethylamine which stimulates a woman's love
centre in the brain. Recent research by Danielle
Piomella at the Neurosciences Institute in San
Diego discovered three new chemicals called Nacylethanolamines, which attach themselves to the
cannabis receptors in a woman's brain, giving her
sensations similar to being high on marijuana. These
273

chemicals are in brown chocolate and cocoa, but not
in white chocolate or coffee.

Why Men Stop Touching and Talking
'Before we were married he would hold my hand in
public, rub my back and talk endlessly to me. Now he
never holds my hand and doesn't want to talk - and he
only touches me when he wants sex.' Does this
complaint sound familiar?

After marriage a man knows all he
needs to know about his partner and
sees no point in excessive talk.
During courtship, a man touches his girlfriend more
than at any other time in their relationship. This is
because he is dying to 'get his hands on her', but he
hasn't received the green light for any sexual touching so
he touches her everywhere else instead. When he gets the
go-ahead for sexual touching, his brain sees no point in
going back to 'the old days'. So he just concentrates on
the 'good bits'. He talks a lot during courtship to collect
information - facts and data about his girlfriend - and
to give her information about himself. By the time
they're married, he knows all he needs to know about
her and sees little point in excessive talk. But when a
man understands that a woman's brain is programmed
to communicate with talk and that her sensitivity to
touch is ten times greater than his, he can teach himself
to become skillful in these areas and the overall quality
of his love life will dramatically improve.
274

Why Men Grope and Women Don't
The hormone oxytocin is known as the 'cuddle
hormone', and it's released when someone's skin is
gently stroked or they are cuddled. It increases sensitivity
to touch and the feelings of bonding, and is a major
factor in a woman's behaviour towards babies and
men. When a woman begins breast-feeding it triggers
the 'let down' reflex that releases milk from the breasts.
If a woman wants to pleasure a man by touching him,
she normally does it the way she would like to receive
it. She scratches his head, caresses his face, rubs his
back and tenderly brushes his hair. This type of touch
has little impact on most men and can even be
annoying. His skin is significantly less sensitive to touch
than a woman's in order that he won't feel pain or
injury during the hunt. Men prefer to be touched in
mainly one area, and as often as possible. This creates
major relationship problems. When a man decides to
sensually touch a woman, he gives her the things he
likes - he gropes her breasts and crotch. This is at the
top of a woman's hate list and causes resentment on
both sides. When a man and woman learn to give each
other sensual touch based on their individual needs and
skin sensitivity, their relationship is even more enriched.

Is There Love in Springtime?
Nature's biological clock works to allow female
animals to give birth in the warm part of the year to
ensure survival of the offspring. If it takes a species, say,
three months to give birth, nature makes the males
randiest in the spring so the young are born in summer.
For humans, gestation takes nine months and so a
man's testosterone level is highest nine months earlier,
275

in the autumn. The old adage, 'In the Spring a man's
fancy turns to love' only applies to species that have a
short gestation period of about three months.

'Love in the spring' is only for animals
who bear offspring quickly.
Research shows that in the Southern Hemisphere a
man's testosterone is highest in March and, in the
Northern Hemisphere, in September. Men have also
been shown to be more competent at map-reading
during these months because spatial ability is enhanced
by testosterone. (Turn back to the chart in Chapter 9
and you'll see how this happens.)

How to Think Sexy
Because the mind is a cocktail of chemical reactions, it
is possible to think yourself into feeling sexy. This
technique is taught by many sex therapists. It involves
concentrating only on the positive aspects of your
partner and recalling exciting sexual experiences you've
had together. The brain reacts by bringing into play the
chemicals that drive your sex urge and make you feel
sexual. This reaction is obvious during the infatuation
stage or courtship when a lover can see only good in
their sweetheart and their sex drives seem endless. It is
also possible to think yourself out of sex by concentrating
on a partner's negatives, which prevents the brain from
releasing the chemicals necessary for a sex drive.

276

Recreating Infatuation
The good news is that because you can think yourself
into sex, you can also think yourself into infatuation
whenever you want by recreating the courtship routines
that existed early in your relationship. This is why
candlelit dinners, romantic beach walks and weekends
away together work so well, by giving couples a
hormonal 'hit' - the feeling that has often been
described as a 'natural high' and 'high on love'. Lovers
who expect the exhilaration of infatuation to last
forever are sadly disappointed but, with effective
planning, it can be recreated whenever you feel the need.

How to Find the Right Partner
Love starts with lust which can last a few hours, a few
days or a few weeks. Next comes infatuation which
lasts, on average, 3 to 12 months before attachment
takes over. When the blinding cocktail of hormones
subsides after a year or so, we now see our partner in
the cold light of day and those little habits we found so
endearing at first begin to become irritating. Once you
thought it was cute that he could never find things in
the fridge, but now it makes you want to scream. He
used to love hearing you talk about every little thing
but now he's contemplating murder. You silently ask
yourself, 'Can I live like this for the rest of my life?
What do we have in common?'

The flower of love is the rose. After
three days all the petals fall off and
you're left with an ugly, prickly thing.
277

Chances are you don't have much in common or much
to talk about. Nature's objective is to throw men and
women together under the influence of a powerful
hormonal cocktail that causes them to procreate and
not think. Finding the right partner means deciding
what things you will have in common with someone in
the long-term, and to do this in advance of nature's
blinding hormonal highs. When infatuation has passed and pass it will - can you maintain a lasting relationship
based on friendship and common interests? Write a list
of the traits and interests you want in a long-term
partner and then you'll know exactly who you are
looking for. A man will have a list of qualities for his
ideal mate but when he goes to a party, his brain is fired
up by testosterone. It then searches for the 'ideal'
woman based on hormonal motivation - nice legs, flat
stomach, round bum, good breasts, and so on, all
features connected with short-term procreation.
Women want a man who is sensitive and caring, has a
V-shaped torso and a great personality, all things
connected to child-rearing, lunch-chasing and protecting. These are also short-term biological needs and have
little to do with success in a modern relationship. When
you write a list of the desirable long-term characteristics
in your perfect partner and keep it handy, it helps you
to be objective about a new person the next time nature
tries to control your thoughts and urges.
Nature wants you to procreate as often as possible
and it uses powerful drugs to push you into it. When
you understand this and are armed with a job description of your ideal long-term mate, you are less likely to
be tricked and more likely to be successful in your hunt
for that elusive perfect partner with whom you'll be
finally able to live happily ever after.

278

CHAPTER 11

TOWARDS A
DIFFERENT
FUTURE

'We may never know what motivated
our fish ancestors to come out of the
water.'
David Attenborough, naturalist

279

hey say it's great to be a man because you can
walk topless on the beach in Tunisia without
getting stoned to death, you don't have to
remember where you left things, you can open your
own jars and eat a banana in front of builders. It's great
to be a woman because you can buy your own clothes,
cross your legs without adjusting yourself and if you
slap a man's face in public, everyone thinks you're in
the right.

T

It's great to be a man because you
can buy cucumbers and marrows
without getting embarrassed.
Men and women are different. Not better or worse but different. Science knows it, but political correctness
does everything it can to deny it. There is a social and
political view that men and women should be treated
equally, based on the strange belief that men and
women are the same. They are demonstrably not.
What Do Men and Women Really Want?
For modern men, not much has changed over the
centuries. Eighty-seven percent of men today say their
work is the most important thing in their life and 99%
say they want a great sex life. For modern women,
however,

280

many of their priorities are quite different to those of their
mothers and grandmothers.
Many women have chosen professional careers because
they want some of the things men have: money, prestige
and power. Studies now show that career women are
also getting many of the other male side-effects: heart
problems, ulcers, stress and premature death.

More than one in three women takes nine
days off each year due to stress.
Forty-four percent of career women say their work is
now their greatest source of stress. A survey of 5,000
women conducted by the British private health
insurance company BUPA and health magazine Top
Santé showed that 66% felt overwork was damaging
their health.
Most women also said that if money was no object,
they would prefer to be a homemaker or 'lady of leisure'
and only 19% said they were interested in actually being
a career woman. In a similar survey in Australia, careers
only rated a top priority for five percent of women aged
18-65 and motherhood ranked as the number one
choice across the board. Sixty percent of women in the
31-39 age group said that motherhood was their first
choice, as compared with 2% for careers. For 31% of
women aged 18-30 motherhood was also number one
and careers accounted for only 18%.
Across the board, 80% of all women put raising their
children in traditional families at the top of their
priority list, showing that media hype and the feminist
drive have not had as big an impact on women's
attitudes as has been previously believed. The values
and priorities of modern women are basically the same
as they have been for centuries. The dramatic difference
281

is that 93% of modern women say financial independence is vital to them and 62% want more power in
politics - in other words they don't want to be
dependent on men.
As for their personal lives, sex rated as the top
priority for a mere 1% of women, compared to 45%
for trust and 22% for respect. Only 20% of women
said their sex life was fantastic, and 63% said their
partner was not a wonderful lover. The bottom line is
that motherhood still rates top of most women's list of
things that give the greatest satisfaction. Many career
women say they work for the money and most of these
live in cities where two incomes are critical for survival.
Many seem to believe that earning money to feed,
clothe and educate the next generation is a more noble
cause than rearing it. Women enjoy parenting more
than men and, unfortunately, most men never get to
appreciate it until they are grandparents.

Occupational Choices
Overall, occupational choices haven't changed much
for men with spatially-related careers still being their
number one choice. There has been a increase in the
number of men entering traditionally female jobs, but a
study of these men would show they have, to a greater
or lesser extent, female-wired brains. This is obvious in
areas such as hairdressing and creative arts, and less
obvious in counselling and teaching.
For women, however, some things have changed, with
84% of working women in the USA now being
part of the information and service sectors. In the Western
world, between half and two-thirds of all new businesses
are owned by women, and they now hold over 40% of
executive, administration and management posts.
282

If you are a woman working in a
traditional male hierarchy, you have
two choices: quit or masculinise.
In traditional male hierarchies, women still have to
struggle to get the top jobs but, as we've seen, most
women don't want these positions anyway. In most
political systems, less than five percent of politicians are
female although they seem to attract 50% of the media
coverage. If you are a woman working in a traditional
male hierarchy, you have one of two choices for
success; one is to quit and get a job where women
receive a fair go, the other is to behave more like a man.
Maleness still opens doors, and studies confirm that
women who wear more 'masculine' clothes have a
better chance of being selected for management
positions than those dressed in 'feminine' styles - even
when the decision-maker is a woman. Male interviewers
also have a preference for candidates who are not
wearing perfume.

The Feminising of Business
Male characteristics and values are largely responsible
for driving people to the top of the tree but feminine
values are fast becoming the only way to stay there.
Traditionally, most organisations have been controlled by a male hierarchy with a dominant male
leader whose credo was, 'Follow me - or else!' These
organisations are today rapidly becoming rarities, just
as the school tough guy, who rose to the top at a time
when brawn was respected over brains, is now also
roundly despised. Masculine priorities need to be
283

understood by any person aiming for the top of the
heap, but feminine value systems are now much better
suited to making the whole show work more efficiently,
harmoniously and, therefore, successfully.
At the top levels, an emphasis on masculine values
leads to internal power struggles. Individuals want to
'go it alone' when agreement cannot be reached.
Initiative and intuitive hunches have no place in the
fight to look, and be, the best, regardless of whether
new strategies or lateral approaches might encourage
new growth and development. Feminine values, on the
other hand, encourage teamwork, collaboration and
interdependence which are far better suited to an
organisation's strategic capabilities and human
resources. This doesn't mean that a man needs to be
effeminate or a woman needs to be masculine, but men
and women need to understand that each gender system
is vital at different times in the rise to the top.

What to Do About Boys
Boys everywhere are failing at school so they need
different schooling to girls. Between 80%-90% of
expulsions in schools in the Western world are boys.
Almost all-hyperactive children are boys and this
condition is rarely seen in girls. Instead of dropping
subjects that don't appeal to their mindset (which is
what girls do) boys drop out of school and become
responsible for most community crime. While girls are
praised for their ability to compose and send emails to
each other on the computer, boys are suspended for
their ability to crack school computer codes and locate
X-rated pictures on the Internet. Overall, boys are
doing poorly in many areas of schoolwork. Male rolemodels have deserted the teaching profession and in
284

primary schools women now dominate teaching and
the few men who remain have traded their suits and ties
for woolly cardigans.
Competition has been replaced by co-operation,
learning facts replaced by empathising with world
suffering, and bossy teachers retrained to become gentle
facilitators - it's all become very caring and sharing.
Out with discipline, in with niceness. Boys are left in a
void with no-one to role-model maleness.
One answer is to have single-sex schools or single-sex
classes and to encourage masculine role models back
into teaching. We are not suggesting a return to the old
days of bullying or the cane - boys need to be taught
the value of respect, tolerance and co-operation - but
they also need to be shown authority, discipline, competition and masculine role-modelling. The feminising
of education has divided boys into two groups - the
soft, gentle types and the undisciplined bullies and
school dropouts.

No Role Models For Boys
Role models for girls are plentiful with most women still
role-modelling warmth, communication and nurturing
to the younger female generation. While female role
models such as Elle MacPherson, Barbra Streisand,
Hillary Clinton, the late Princess Diana and Madonna
all showed masculine attributes like self assertiveness
and sexual independence, they also role-modelled the
typical female nurturing behaviours. Even the Iron
Lady, Margaret Thatcher, had no problem with showing
her feminine side in the face of human tragedy or loss.
But boys now lack male role-models. Past male rolemodels included Clarke Gable, James Dean and James
Bond who all displayed classic male traits but they also
285

role-modelled manners, courtesy, respect for women
and would defend their family or friends if necessary.
These role-models have been replaced by Sylvester
Stallone, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Bruce Willis and Jean
Claude Van Damme playing characters who use
violence to solve their problems and cause mindless
destruction of other people's property; or wimpy characters like Hugh Grant who role-models more female
behaviours than male. Four out of five primary school
teachers are now female and more and more boys are
being raised by single mothers. A man who role-models
a traditional male attribute such as holding a door open
for a woman can be accused of being sexist, chauvinist
or aggressive.

The Sports Hero
Many boys no longer have an older male role-model in
their lives and this has paved the way for a new role
model - the sports hero. For nearly 200 years the objectives of sport were twofold; first, to allow young men to
burn up their testosterone, which benefited the entire
community and second, to teach the life skills and values
that help young people to become effective adults. The
importance of ethics and fairness, being a good team
player, and the principles of achieving personal and
team goals were passed on to younger generations.
Players were taught consideration and respect of other
participants and the players were considered to be more
important than the game. Since the 1980s, however,
most sporting activities have become controlled by
money and players regularly receive staggering amounts
of money for their spatial ability - hitting, kicking or
throwing something at a target. In most sports today,
the game has become more important than the players.
286

Where else can you now see greater displays of temper,
violence, aggression, egotism and contempt for others
than on a sports field? In past generations sport was
used for character development and the player's wellbeing was paramount because money was never an
issue. Today, players are left on the field crumpled,
abused, broken, demoralised or half-dead as the pack
pushes the ball over the line and everyone gets paid. In
the clubs and hotels after the game, young men are
shown the role-modelling of crude behaviour, severe
drunkenness and general disrespect for others. Assaults
on umpires or even biting off an opponent's ear are considered humorous by some fans.
The phenomena of the sports hero has brought some
ominous role-modelling to the youth of sports-crazy
nations. Like pop stars, they can be an unknown one day
and revered as gods the next, often giving half-baked,
inexperienced advice to impressionable young people.
Sports heroes are used to sell almost every type of
merchandise and product imaginable. Many people in
society, particularly young men, now believe that their
measure of worth as an individual is related to how
well they can kick a ball or hit a target.
The sports hero syndrome is not as big a problem in
Europe where, mainly due to colder climate, indoor
activities or cultural pursuits are encouraged. As a
result, Beethoven is as well known in Europe as
Michael Jordan or David Beckham.

Is This All Politically Correct?
We surveyed more than 10,000 conference delegates in
six countries where political correctness is high on
the political agenda, and found that 98% of men and
94% of women felt it had become an oppressive
287

concept that stifled their freedom to say what they felt
without censure.
Political correctness, in regard to gender, was originally
intended to combat sexist attitudes, language,
male/female inequalities and to give women equal opportunity. Women were supposedly being oppressed by
dominant men, but, clearly, political correctness is not
supported by the majority. So, will it ever work?
Scientists say that it's unlikely. It has taken a million years
for men and women to evolve into what they are today,
and it will probably take another million years for them
to evolve into beings that match a politically correct environment. The biggest problem humankind faces today is
that their lofty ideals and concepts of behaviour are a
million years ahead of their genetic reality.

Our Biology Hasn't Changed Much
Boys want to play with things; girls want to interact
with people. Boys want to control, dominate and reach
the top, but girls are more concerned with morality,
relationships and people. Women are still a minority in
big business and the political arena, but not because of
male oppression. It's just that women are not interested
in those things.

Despite the best intentions of equal
opportunity employers, boys still stubbornly go into jobs with a mechanical
and spatial bias and girls seem compelled
to seek jobs involving human interaction.
288

Israeli kibbutzim have for years tried to remove the
sex stereotyping of boys and girls. Children's clothes,
shoes, hairstyles and lifestyles were fashioned on one
sexless, neutral model. Boys were encouraged to play
with dolls, sew, knit, cook and clean, and girls were
motivated to play football, climb trees and play darts.
The idea of the kibbutz was to have a sexually neutral
society in which there were no rigid formulae for each
sex and each member had equal opportunity and equal
responsibility within the group. Sexist language and
phrases like 'big boys don't cry' and 'little girls don't
play in the dirt' were removed from the language and
kibbutzniks claimed that they could demonstrate a
complete interchangeability of roles between the sexes.
So, what happened?
After 90 years of kibbutzim, studies have shown that
boys in the kibbutz constantly display aggressive and
disobedient behaviour, form power groups, fight
amongst themselves, form unwritten hierarchies and do
'deals', while girls co-operate with each other, avoid
conflicts, act affectionately, make friends and share
with one another. Given a free hand to choose their
own school courses and subjects, each opted for sexspecific courses, with boys studying physics, engineering
and sports, and girls becoming teachers, counsellors,
nurses and personnel managers. Their biology directed
them to pursuits and occupations that fitted the wiring
of their brains.
Studies of neutrally-reared children in these societies
show the removal of the mother/child bond does not
reduce the sex differences or preferences in children.
Rather, it creates a generation of children who feel
neglected and confused and are likely to grow into
screwed-up adults.

289

Finally ...
Relationships between men and women work despite
overwhelming sex differences. Much of the credit here
goes to women because they have the necessary skills to
manage relationships and family. They're equipped
with the ability to sense the motives and meanings
behind speech and behaviour, and can therefore predict
outcomes or take action early to avert problems. This
factor alone would make the world a much safer place
if every nation's leader was a woman. Men are
equipped to hunt and chase lunch, find their way home,
fire-gaze and procreate - that's it. They need to learn
new ways for modern survival just like women do.
Relationships become rocky when men and women
fail to acknowledge they are biologically different and
when each expects the other to live up to their expectations. Much of the stress we experience in relationships
comes from the false belief that men and women
are now the same and have the same priorities, drives
and desires.
For the first time in human history we are raising and
educating boys and girls in identical ways, teaching
them that they are the same and that each is as capable
as the other. Then, as adults, they get married and wake
up one morning to find they are different to each other
in every way, shape and form. It's little wonder that
young people's relationships and marriages are in such
disastrous shape. Any concept that insists on sexual
uniformity is fraught with danger because it demands
the same behaviour from both men and women, who
have quite different brain circuitry. Sometimes it's hard
to understand why Nature would plan such apparent
incompatibility between the sexes, but it only looks
that way because our biology is so at odds with our
current environment.
290

The good news is that when you understand the
origins of these differences, you not only find it easier
to live with them, you can manage, appreciate, and end
up cherishing them too.
Men want power, achievement and sex. Women want
relationships, stability and love. To feel upset about this
is as useful as abusing the sky for raining. Accepting
that it rains allows you to cope with the weather by
carrying an umbrella or raincoat, so it is no longer a
problem. In the same way, anticipating the difficulties
or conflicts that might arise in relationships as a result
of our differences enables you to anticipate and defuse
them as they occur.
Every day, brain scans are giving us new and exciting
insights into how our brains operate and explain many
of the things we take for granted. When a girl with
anorexia looks in a mirror she sees herself as fat or
obese. What she sees is somehow a distortion of her
reality. Dr Bryan Lask of London's Great Ormond
Street Hospital scanned the brains of anorexic
teenagers in 1998 and found that nearly all of them had
reduced blood flow to that part of the brain that
controls vision. This is just one of dozens of studies that
are now uncovering what happens in the brain when
things go haywire.
Consistent and solid evidence is coming from scientists
everywhere showing that biochemicals in the womb
direct the structure of our brains, in turn dictating our
preferences. But most of us don't need millions of
dollars worth of brain-scanning equipment to know that
men don't listen and women can't read maps; the
equipment just explains what is often self-evident.
In writing this book, we have presented information that you probably already knew on a subconscious level, but have never stopped consciously
to understand.
291

It's amazing that here, at the beginning of the 21st
century, we still don't teach an understanding of male
and female relationships in our schools. We prefer to
study rats running around mazes or to look at how a
monkey will do backflips when conditioned by the
reward of bananas. Science is a slow, lumbering discipline and takes years to feed its results into the
education system.
So it's therefore up to you, the reader, to educate
yourself. For only then can you hope to have
relationships as happy and as fulfilling as both men and
women deserve.

292

REFERENCES
Allen, L.S., Richey, M.F., Chai, Y.M. & Gorski, R.A., 'Sex differences
in the corpus callosum of the living human being', Journal of
Neurosdence 11, 933-942 (1991) Allen, S. & Gorski, R.A.,
'Sexual orientation and the size of the
anterior commissure in the human brain', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA 89, 7199-7202 (1992) Amen,
Daniel G., Change Your Brain, Change Your Life: The
Breakthrough Program for Conquering Anxiety, Depression,
Obsessiveness, Anger, and Impulsiveness, Times Books (2000)
Andrews, Simon, Anatomy of Desire: The Science and Psychology of
Sex, Love and Marriage, Little, Brown (2000) Antes, J.R., McBridge,
R.B., & Collins, J.D., 'The effect of a new city
route on the cognitive maps of its residents', Environment and
Behaviour 20, 75-91 (1988) Archer, John & Lloyd Barbara,
Sex and Gender, New York:
Cambridge University Press (1995) Bailey, J.M. & Bell, A.P.,
'Familiarity of female and male
homosexuality', Behaviour Genetics 23, 313-322 (1993) Bailey, J.M.
& Pillard R.C., 'A genetic study of male sexual orientation' Archives of
General Psychiatry 48, 1089-1096 (1991) Bailey, J.M., Pillard, R.C.,
Neale, M.C. & Agyei, Y., 'Heritable factors
influence sexual orientation in women', Archives of General
Psychiatry 50, 217-223 (1993) Baker, Robin, Sperm Wars:
Infidelity, Sexual Conflict and Other
Bedroom Battles, Fourth Estate, Allen & Unwin (1997) Barash, D.,
Sociobiology, London: Fontana (1981) Barinaga, M., 'Is homosexuality
biological?' Science 253, 956-957
(1991) Baum, M.J., Bressler, S.C., Daum, M.C., Veiga, C.A. &
McNamee,
C.S., 'Ferret mothers provide more anogenital licking to male
offspring: possible contribution to psychosexual differentiation',
Physiology and Behaviour 60, 353-359 (1996)

293

Beatty, W.W., and Truster, A.I., 'Gender differences in geographical
knowledge', Sex Roles 16, 565-590 (1987) Beatty, W.W., 'The
Fargo map test: A standardised method for
assessing remote memory for visuospatial information', Journal of
Clinical Psychology 44, 61-67 (1988)
Becker, Jill B., Behavioural Endocrinology, Cambridge: MIT Press (1992)
Benbow, C.P. & Stanley, J.C., 'Sex differences in mathematical
reasoning ability: more facts', Science 222, 1029-1031 (1983)
Berenbaum, S. A.K., & Leveroni, C, 'Early hormones and sex
differences in cognitive abilities', Learning and Individual
Differences 7, 303-321 (1995) Berrebi, A.S. et al., 'Corpus callosum:
Region-specific effects of sex,
early experience and age', Brain Research 438, 216-224 (1988)
Berry, J. W., 'Temne and Eskimo perceptual skills', International
Journal of Psychology 1, 207-229 (1966) Berry, J.W.,
'Ecological and social factors in spatial perceptual
development', Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science 3, 324-336
(1971)
Biddulph, Steve, Raising Boys, Berkeley: Celestial Arts (1998) Biddulph,
Steve & Shaaron, More Secrets Of Happy Children, New
York: HarperCollins (1994)
Blum, Deborah, Sex on the Brain, New York: Viking, Penguin (1997)
Booth, A., et al., 'The influence of testosterone on deviance in
adulthood: Assessing and explaining the relationship', Criminology,
Vol. 31 (1), 93-117 (1 Nov 1993)
Botting, Kate & Douglas, Sex Appeal, London: Boxtree Ltd. (1995)
Bower, B., 'Genetic clue to male homosexuality emerges' Science
News, 37 (17 July 1993) Boyd, R., & Silk J.R., How Humans
Evolved, New York: Norton
(1996)
Brasch, R., How Did It Begin?, New York: David McKay (1965)
Brasch, R., How Did Sex Begin?, New York: David McKay (1976)
Brown, M.A. 8c M.J. Broadway, 'The cognitive maps of adolescents:
Confusion about inter-town distances', Professional Geographer 33,
315-325 (1981) Burr, C.I., A Separate Creation, London, New York:
Bantam Press,
167-177(1996) Buss, David M., The Evolution of Desire, New York:
Basic Books,
(1994) Buss, D.M., The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human
Mating,
London: HarperCollins, 84-85 (1994) Cabot, Dr. Sandra, Don't Let
Your Hormones Rule Your Life, Sydney,
Australia: Women's Health Advisory Service (1991)
294

Carper, Jean., your Miracle Brain, New York: HarperCollins (2000)
Casey, M.B., Brabeck, M.M. & Nuttall, R.L., 'As the twig is bent:
The biology and socialisation of gender roles in women', Brain and
Cognition 27, 237-246 (1995) Chang, K.T., & Antes, J.R., 'Sex
and cultural differences in map
reading', The American Cartographer 14, 29-42 (1987) Coates,
Jennifer, Women, Men and Language, 2d ed., New York:
Longman (1993)
Collis, Jack, Yes You Can, Australia: HarperCollins (1993) Crick,
Francis, The Astonishing Hypothesis, New York: Macmillan
(1994) Crick, F., & Koch, C., 'Are we aware of neural activity in
primary
visual cortex?', Nature 375, 121-123 (1995) Dabbs, J. M., 'Age
and Seasonal Variation in Serum Testosterone
Concentration Among Men', Chronobiology International, Vol. 7
(3), 245-9 (1990) Dabbs, J. M., et al., 'Testosterone, crime and
misbehaviour among 692
male prison inmates', Pergamon, Vol 18 (5), 627-633 (1995)
Dabbs, J. M., Testosterone, aggression and delinquency', Second
International Androgen Workshop 18-20 (Feb 1995) Damasio,
Antonio R., Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the
Human Brain, Avon Books (1995) Darwin, Charles, The Voyage of
the Beagle, New York: Doubleday
(1962)
Darwin, C., The Descent of Man, London: Murray, 569 (1871)
Dawkins, Richard, The Blind Watchmaker, New York: Norton (1987)
Dawkins, Richard, The Selfish Gene, 2d ed., New York: Oxford
University Press (1990) Dawkins, R., 'Universal Darwinism', in
Bendall, D. S. (ed.), Evolution
from Molecules to Man, New York: Cambridge University Press
(1983) Dawkins, R., River out of Eden: A Darwinian View of
Life, New
York: Basic Books (1995) Deacon, Terrence, The Symbolic
Species: The Co-Evolution of
Language and the Brain, New York: Norton (1997) DeAngelis,
Barbara, Secrets About Men Every Woman Should Know,
New York: Dell (1991) Dejong, F. H., and Van De Poll, N. E.,
Relationship Between Sexual
Behaviour in Male and Female Rats: Effects of Gonadal Hormones,
New York: Elsevier (1984) De Lacoste, M.C., Holloway, R.L.
& Woodward, D. J., 'Sex
differences in the fetal corpus callosum', Human Neurobiology 5,
93-96 (1986)
295

De Lacoste-Utamsing, C. & Hollaway, R.L., 'Sexual dimorphism in
the human corpus callosum', Science 216, 1431-1432 (1982)
Denenberg, V.H., Fitch, R.H., Schrott, L. M., Cowell, P.E. & Waters,
N.S., 'Corpus callosum: interactive effects of infantile handling and
testosterone in the rat', Behavioural Neuroscience 105, 562-566
(1991) DeVries, G.J., DeBruin, J.P.C., Uylings, H.B.M., and Corner,
M.A.,
(eds.), Differences in the Brain, Relationship Between Structure
and Function, New York: Elsevier (1984) Diamond, Jared., The Third
Chimpanzee, New York: HarperCollins
(1992)
Dixon, N., Our Own Worst Enemy, London: Futura (1988)
Dorner, G., 'Prenatal Stress and Possible Aetiogenetic Factors of
Homosexuality in Human Males', Edokrinologie 75, 365-368
(1980) Dubovsky, Steven L., Mind-Body Deceptions, New York:
Norton
(1997) Eckert, E.D., Bouchard, T.J., Bohlen, J. 8c
Heston, L.L.,
'Homosexuality in monozygotic twins reared apart', British Journal
of Psychiatry 14, 421-425 (1986) Edelson, Edward, Francis Crick
and James Watson and the Building
Blocks of Life, New York: Oxford University Press (1998) Edwards,
Betty, The New Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain,
JP Tardier (1999) Ehrhardt, A.A., and Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L.,
'Effects of prenatal sex
hormones on gender-related behaviour', Science 211, 1312-1314
(1981)
Ellis, Havelock, Man and Woman, North Stratford, NH: Ayer (1974)
Ellis, Lee, Research Methods on the Social Sciences, Minot State
University (1994) Farah, Martha J., 'Is visual imagery really
visual? Overlooked
evidence from neurophychology', Psychological Review 95, 307-317
(1988) Farrell, Dr Elizabeth, & Westmore, Ann, The HRT
Handbook,
Australia: Anne O'Donovan (1993) Fast, Julius and Bernstein,
Meredith, Sexual Chemistry: What It Is,
How to Use It, New York: M. Evans (1983) Fisher, Helen, The First
Sex, London: Random House (1999) Fisher, Helen E., Anatomy of
Love, New York: Norton (1992) Fisher, H. W., Anatomy of Love: The
Natural History of Monogamy,
Adultery, and Divorce, New York: Norton (1992) Freud, Sigmund,
Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, New York:
Random House (1905)
296

Gardner, Howard, Extraordinary Minds, New York: Basic Books
(1998). Garner, Alan, Conversationally Speaking, 2d ed., Los Angeles:
Lowell
House (1997) Gazzaniga, Michael S., (ed.) The New Cognitive
Neurosciences, MIT
Press (1999)
Ghiglieri, Michael P., The Dark Side of Man, Perseus Books (1999)
Gilmartin, P.P., 'Maps, mental imagery, and gender in the recall of geographical information', The American Cartographer 13, 335-344
(1986) Gilmartin, P.P. & Patton, J.C., 'Comparing the sexes on
spatial
abilities; map-use skills', Annals of the Association of American
Geographer 74, 605-619 (1984)
Glass, Lillian, He Says, She Says, New York: Putnam (1992) Gochros,
Harvey, & Fischer, Joel, Treat Yourself to a Better Sex Life,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall (1986)
Goffman, Erving, Gender Advertisements, New York: Harper (1976)
Goleman, Daniel, Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More
Than IQ, New York: Bantam (1997) Gorski, R.A., 'Sex
differences in the rodent brain: their nature and
origin', in Reinsch, J.M., et al. (eds.), Masculinity and Femininity,
Oxford University Press, 37-67 (1987) Gray, John, Mars
and Venus in the Bedroom, New York:
HarperCollins (1995) Gray, John, Men Are From Mars, 'Women Are
From Venus, New York:
HarperCollins (1993) Gray, John, Men, Women & Relationships,
2d ed., Hillsboro, OR:
Beyond Words (1993) Gray, John, What Your Mother Couldn't Tell
You and Your Father
Didn't Know, New York: HarperCollins (1994) Greenfield, Susan, The Human Brain: A Guided Tour, New York:
Basic Books (1997) Greenfield, Susan, The Human Mind Explained:
An Owner's Guide to
the Mysteries of the Mind, New York: Henry Holt (1996)
Greenfield, Susan, journey to the Centers of the Mind, New York:
Basic Books (1998)
Grice, Julia, What Makes a Woman Sexy, New York: Dodd, Mead Gur,
R. & Gur, R., 'Sex and handedness differences in cerebral blood
flow, during rest and cognitive activity', Science 217, 659-661
(1982) Haig, D., 'Genetic imprinting and the theory of parentoffspring
conflict', Developmental Biology 3, 153-160 (1992)
Hampson, E. & Kimura, E, 'Reciprocal effects of hormonal
297

fluctuations on human motor and perceptospatial skills', Research
Bulletin 656, Department of Psychology, University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada (June 1987) Hampson, E. &
Kimura, D., 'Sex differences and hormonal influences
on cognitive function in humans', in Becker, J.B., Breedlove, S.M. &
Crews, D. (ed.), Behavioural Endocrinology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press, 357-400 (1992) Handy, Charles, The
Empty Raincoat: Making Sense of the Future,
London: Hutchinson (1994) Harlow, H. F. & Zimmerman, R. R., 'The
development of affectional
responses in infant monkeys', Journal of the American Philosophical
Society 102, 501-509 (1958) Harpending, H., 'Gene frequencies,
DNA sequences, and human
origins', Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 37, 384-395 (1994)
Hatfield, E. & Rapson, R. L., Love, Sex and Intimacy: Their
Psychology, Biology, and History, New York: HarperCollins (1993)
Hendrix, Harville, Ph.D., Getting the Love You Want: A Guide for
Couples, New York: HarperCollins (1990) Henley, Nancy
M., Body Politics: Power, Sex and Nonverbal
Communication, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall (1977) Henry,
W.A. III, 'Born gay?', Time, 44-47 (26 July 1993) See also;
Maddox, J., 'Is homosexuality hard-wired?', Nature 353, 13 (1991)
Hite, Shere, Women and Love, New York: Knopf (1987) Hobson,
J.Allan, The Chemistry of Conscious States: How the Brain
Changes Its Mind, Boston: Little, Brown (1994) Hobson, J.Allan,
Consciousness, New York: W.H. Freeman (1998) Hoyenga, Katharine,
Blick, and Kermit T. Hoyenga, The Question of
Sex Differences, Boston: Little, Brown (1979) Hoyenga, K.B.,
Hoyenga, K. T., Gender-Related Differences, Allyn &
Bacon, 343-345 (1993) Hoyenga, op cit., 321-2; Mann, V., et al., 'Sex
differences in cognitive
abilities: A cross-cultural perspective', Neuropsychologia, Vol.28,
1063-1077(1990) Hu, S., et al.,' Linkage between sexual orientation
and chromosome
Xq28 in males but not females', Nature Genetics 11, 248-256
(1995) Humphrey, Nicholas, A History of the Mind, New York:
Simon &
Schuster (1992) Humphrey, Nicholas, 'Contrast Illusions in
Perspective', Nature 232,
91-93 (1970) Hutchinson, John B. (ed.), Biological
Determinants of Sexual
Behaviour, New York: John Wiley (1978)
Huxley, Aldous, The Doors of Perception, New York: Harper (1963)
298

Jensen, Eric, Brain-Based Learning, Brain Store Inc. (2000) Johnson,
Gary, Monkey Business, Gower Publishing (1995) Kagan, J., 'Sex
differences in the human infant', in McGill, Thomas E.
et al. (ed.), Sex and Behaviour: Status and Prospectus, New York:
Plenum (1978) Kahn, Elayne J., and Rudnitsky, David A., Love
Codes: How to
Decipher Men's Secret Signals About Romance, New York: NALDutton (1992) Katz, J. N., The Invention of Homosexuality, New
York: Button
(1993) Kimura, D., 'Are men's and women's brains really
different?',
Canadian Psycol. 28 (2), 133-147 (1987) Kimura, D., 'Estrogen
replacement therapy may protect against
intellectual decline in post-menopausal women', Hormones and
Behaviour, 29, 312-321 (1995) Kimura, D., 'How Different are the
male and female brains?', Orbit,
17, no.3, 13-14 (October 1986) Kimura, D., 'Sex differences in the
brain', Scientific American 267,
118-125 (1992) Kimura, D., 'Sex differences in the brain', Scientific
American, 119
(1992) Kimura, D., 'Sex, sexual orientation and sex hormones
influence
human cognitive function', Current Opinion in Neurobiology 6,
259-263 (1996) Kimura, D., 'Male brain, female brain: The
hidden difference',
Psychology Today, 51-58 (November 1985) Kimura, D. & Hampson
E., 'Cognitive pattern in men and women is
influenced by fluctuations in sex hormones', Current Directions in
Psychological Science 3, 57-61 (1994) Kimura, D. & Harshman, R.,
'Sex differences in brain organisation for
verbal and non-verbal function', Progress in Brain Research 61, De
Vreis, G. J. et al. (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, 423-440 (1984)
Kimura, Doreen, Neuromotor Mechanisms in Human
Communication, New York: Oxford University Press (1993) King,
Dr. Rosie, Good Loving, Great Sex, Australia: Random House
(1997) Kinsey, A.C., Pomeroy, W.B. & Martin, C.E., Sexual
Behaviour in the
Human Male, Philadelpia: Saunders (1948) Kumler and
Butterfield, Gender Difference In Map Reading,
University of Colorado (1998) Lakoff, Robin, Language and
Woman's Place, New York: Harper
(1976)
LeVay, S. & Hamer, H., 'Evidence for a biological influence in male
299

homosexuality', Scientific American 269, 20-25 (May 1994)
LeVay, S., 'A difference in hypothalamic structure between hetero
sexual and homosexual men', Science 253, 1034-1037 (1991)
LeVay, S., The Sexual Brain, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press
(1993) Lewis, C., et al., 'The prevalence of specific arithmetic difficulties
and
specific reading difficulties in 9 to 10 year old boys and girls', Journal
of Child Psychological Psychiatry, Vol.35 (2), 283-292 (1994) Lewis,
David, The Secret Language of Success, New York: Carroll &
Graf (1990) Lewis, Michael, 'Culture and gender roles: There is no
unisex in the
nursery', Psychology Today 5, 54-57 (1972) Lewis, Michael, and
Cherry, Linda, 'Social behaviour and language
acquisition', in Lewis, Michael and Leonard A. (ed.), Rosenblum
Interaction, Conversation, and the Development of Language, New
York: John Wiley (1977) Lloyd, B. and Archer, J., Sex and
Gender, London: Penguin Books
(1982) Logic, R. H., Visuospatial Working Memory, Hillsdale, N. J.
Erlbaum
(1995)
Lorenz, Konrad, King Solomon's Ring, New York: Crowell (1952)
Lorenz, Konrad, On Aggression, New York: Harcourt (1974)
Maccoby, Eleanor, and Jacklin, Carol N., The Psychology of Sex
Differences, Stanford: Stanford University Press (1974) Mack, C. M.,
Boehm, G. W., Berrebi, A.S. & Denenberg, V. H., 'Sex
differences in the distribution of axon types within the genu of the
rat corpus callosum', Brain Research 697, 152-156 (1995) Marcel,
A.J., 'Conscious and preconscious perception: Experiments on
visual masking and word recognition', Cognitive Psychology 15,
197-237 (1983) Marr, D. & Nishihara, H. K., 'Representation and
recognition of the
spatial organization of three-dimensional shapes', Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London, B, 200, 269-294 (1978) Martin P., The
Sickening Mind, HarperCollins (1998) Maynard-Smith, John, Did
Darwin Get It Right?, New York: Penguin
(1993) Maynard Smith, J., The Theory of Evolution, New York:
Cambridge
University (1975/1993) McCormick, C.M., Witelson, S.F &
Kingstone, E., 'Left-handedness in
homosexual men and women: Neuroendocrine implications',
Psychoneuroendocrinology 15, 69-76 (1990) McGee, M.G.,
Human spatial abilities; Sources of sex differences,
New York: Praeger Press (1979)
300

McGuiness, D., 'How schools discriminate against boys', Human
Nature, 82-88 (February 1979)
McKinlay, Deborah, Love Lies, London: HarperCollins (1994) Millard,
Anne, Early Man, London: Pan (1981) Miller, Geoffrey F, The Mating
Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the
Evolution of Human Nature, London: Doubleday (2000) Miller,
S.K., 'Gene hunters sound warning over gay link', New
Scientist, 4-5 (24 July 1993)
Moir, Anne, & Jessel, David, BrainSex, New York: Dell (1992) Money,
J., 'Ablatio penis: normal male infant sex-reassignment as a
girl', Archives of Sexual Behaviour 4, 65-71 (1975) Money, J. &
Erhdardt, A.A., Man and Woman, Boy and Girl: The
Differentiation and Dimorphism of Gender Identity from
Conception to Maturity, Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins
University Press (1972) Money, J. & Erhdart, A.A., 'Progestin-induced
hermaphroditism: I.Q.
and psychosexual identity in the study of ten girls', Journal of Sex
Research 3, 83-100 (1967) Montagu, Ashley, Touching: The Human
Significance of Skin, New
York: Harper (1971) Moore, C.L., 'Maternal behaviour of rats is
affected by hormonal
condition of pups', Journal of Comparative and Physiological
Psychology 1, 123-129 (1982)
Morris, Desmond, Animalwatching, New York: Crown (1990) Morris,
Desmond, Babywatching, New York: Crown (1992) Morris, Desmond,
Bodywatching, New York: Crown (1985) Morris, Desmond, Intimate
Behaviour, New York: Random House
(1971)
Morris, Desmond, The Naked Ape, New York: Dell (1980) Morris,
Desmond, Manwatching, New York: Abrams (1977 ) Moyer, K.E., 'Sex
differences in aggression', In Friedman et al. (ed.),
Sex Differences in Behaviour, New York: John Wiley (1974)
O'Connor, Dagmar, How to Make Love to the Same Person for the
Rest of Your Life and Still Love It, New York: Bantam (1986)
Ornstein, Robert E., The Right Mind: Making Sense of the
Hemispheres, New York: Harcourt (1997) Pattatucci, A.M.L. &
Hamer, D.H., 'Development and familiarity of
sexual orientation in females', Behaviour Genetics 25, 407-420
(1995) Pease, Allan, Body Language, Sydney Australia: Camel
Publishing
(1979) Pease, Allan, Everything Men Know About Women, Sydney,
Australia:
Camel Publishing (1986)
301

Pease, Allan, Rude And Politically Incorrect Jokes, London: Pease
Training International (1998)
Pease, Allan, Talk Language, Sydney, Australia: Camel Publishing (1989)
Pease, Allan & Barbara, Memory Language, Sydney, Australia: Pease
Learning Systems (1993) Pease, Raymond, & Dr. Ruth, Tap Dance
Your Way to Social Ridicule,
London: Pease Training International (1998) Peck, M. Scott,
The Road Less Traveled, New York: Simon &
Schuster (1985) Pertot, Dr. Sandra, A Commonsense Guide to Sex,
Sydney, Australia:
HarperCollins (1984) Peters, Brooks, Terrific Sex in Fearful Times,
New York: St. Martin's
Press (1988) Petras, Kathryn, and Petras, Ross, The 776 Stupidest
Things Ever Said,
New York: Doubleday (1993) Pillard, R.C. & Bailey, J. M., Archives
of Sexual Behaviour 24, 1-20
(1195); 'Human sexual orientation has a heritable component',
Human Biology 70, 347-365 (1998)
Pillard, R.C. & Bailey, J.M., 'A biologic perspective on sexual orientation', The Psychiatric Clinics of North America 18, 71-84 (1995) Pool,
R., 'Evidence for homosexuality gene', Science 261, 291-292
(1993)
Quillam, Susan, Sexual Body Talk, New York: Carroll & Graf (1992)
Rabin, Claire, Equal Partners, Good Friends: Empowering Couples
Through Therapy, London: Routledge (1996)
Reinisch, June M. and Rosenblum, Leonard (eds.),
Masculinity-Femininity, New York: Oxford University Press (1987)
Reinisch, J.M. et al. (eds.), Masculinity and Femininity, The Kinsey
Institute Series, Oxford University Press (1987) Reisner, Paul,
Couplehood, New York: Bantam (1994) Rice, G., Anderson, C., Risch,
N. & Evers, G., 'Male homosexuality;
Absence of linkage to microsatellite markers at Xql28', Science 284,
665-667 (1999) Ridley, Matt, The Red Queen: Sex and the
Evolution of Human
Nature, New York: Macmillan (1993) Robbins, Jim, A Symphony in
the Brain : The Evolution of the New
Brain Wave Biofeedback, Atlantic Monthly Pr. (2000) Roger, L.J.,
The Development of Brain and Behaviour in the Chicken',
Wallingford: CAB International (1995) Rogers, L.J., 'Behavioural,
structural and neurochemical asymmetries
in the avian brain; A model system for studying visual development
and processing', Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 20,
487-503 (1996)
302

Rosenblum, L. A., 'Sex Differences in Mother-Infant Attachment in
Monkeys', In Friedman, R. et al. (ed.) Sex Differences in Behaviour,
New York: John Wiley (1974)
Self, C.M., Gopal, S., Golledge, R.G., and Fenstermaker, S., 'Genderrelated differences in spatial abilities', Progress in Human
Geography 16, 315-342 (1992) Shapiro, R., Origins, London: Pelican
(1988) Shaywitz, Sally and Bennett, 'How is the brain formed?' Nature
373,
607-609(1995) Stickels, Terry, Are You As Smart As You Think?
: 150 Original
Mathematical, Logical, and Spatial-Visual Puzzles for All Levels of
Puzzle Solvers, Griffin (2000) Stumpf, H., and Klieme, E., 'Sexrelated differences in spatial ability:
More evidence for convergence', Perceptual and Motor Skills 69
Part 1, 915-921 (1989) Suter, William and Beatrice, Guilt
Without Sex, London: Pease
Training International (1998) Swaab, D.F., 'Development of
the Human Hypothalamus',
Neurochem Research (US), Vol.20 (5), 509-519 (May 1995) Swaab,
D.F. & Hofman, M.A., 'An enlarged suprachiasmatic nucleus
in homosexual men', Brain Research 587, 141-148 (1990) Swaab,
D.F. & Hofman, M.A., 'Sexual differentiation of the human
hypothalamus in relation to gender and sexual orientation', Trends
in Neurosciences 18, 264-270 (1996) Swaab, D. F. & Hofman, M.A.,
'Sexual differentiation of the human
brain', Progress in Brain Research 61, De Vries, G. J. et al. (eds),
Amsterdam: Elsevier (1984)
Tannen, Deborah, Talking from 9 to 5, New York: Morrow (1994)
Tannen, Deborah, That's Not What I Meant, New York: Ballantine
(1986) Tannen, Deborah, You Just Don't Understand: Women and
Men in
Conversation, New York: Morrow (1990) Tare, M. J., 'Rotating
objects to recognize them', Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review 2, 55-82 (1995) Tarr, M. J., & Pinker, S.,
'Mental rotation and orientation-dependence
in shape recognition', Cognitive Psychology 21, 233-282 (1989)
Thorne, Barrie, Kramarae, Cheris & Henley, Nancy (eds.), Language,
Gender and Society, Boston: Heinle & Heinle (1983) Tyler, C. W,
'Cyclopean vision', In Regan, D. (ed.), 'Vision and visual
dysfunction', Binocular Vision, Vol. 9. New York: Macmillan (1989)
Wegesin, D. J., 'Relation between language lateralisation and spatial
ability in gay and straight women and men', Laterality 3, 227-239
(1998)
303

Westheimer, Ruth, Dr. Ruth's Guide to Good Sex, New York: Warner
(1986)
Whiteside, Robert, Face Language, New York: Pocket Books (1974)
Whiteside, Robert, Face Language II, Hollywood, FL: Frederick Fell
(1988) Wilson, Edward O., Sociobiology: The New Synthesis,
Cambridge:
Harvard University Press (1975) Wilson, Glenn D., and Nias, David,
The Mystery of Love, London:
Open Books (1976)
Winston Macauley, Marnie, Manspeak, Newport House (1996)
Witleson, S. F., 'The brain connection: The corpus collosum is larger in
left handers', Science 229, 665-68 (1985)
Witleson, S. F, 'Sex differences in the neurology of cognition: psychological, social, educational and clinical implications', In Sullerot, E.
(ed.), Le Fait Feminin, Paris: Fayard, 287-303 (1978) Witleson,
S.F., 'Left hemisphere specialisation for language in the
newborn brain', 96, 641-46 (1973)
Witleson, S.F., 'Hemispheric specialisation for linguistic and nonlinguistic tactual perception using a dichotomous stimulation
technique', Cortex 10, 3-7 (1974) Witleson, S.F., 'Sex and the
single hemisphere: specialisation of the
right hemisphere for spatial processing', Science 193, 425-427
(1976)
Wolf, Naomi, The Beauty Myth, New York: Anchor (1992)
Wright, Robert, The Moral Animal, New York: Pantheon (1994)
Young, J. Z., An Introduction to the Study of Man, New York:
Oxford University Press (1971) Zappia, J.V. & Rogers, L. J., 'Sex
differences and the reversal of brain
asymmetry by testosterone in chickens', Behavioural Brain Research
23,261-267 (1987)

304

305

